The Complete Works 

of 

Lewis Carroll 




THE COMPLETE WORKS OF 


Lewis Carroll 

WITH THE ILLUSTRATIONS BY 

John Tenniel 



First Published 


1939 



CONTENTS 


I. ALICE’S ADVENTURES IN WONDER- 


LAND 


i. Down the Rabbit-Hole 

15 

2. The Pool of Tears 

23 

3. A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale 

3 i 

4. The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill 

38 

5. Advice from a Caterpillar 

48 

6. Pig and Pepper 

57 

7. A Mad Tea-Party 

68 

8. The Queen’s Croquet Ground 

76 

9. The Mock Turtle's Story 

86 

10. The Lobster-Quadrille 

95 

1 x. Who Stole the Tarts ? 

104 

12. Alice’s Evidence 

hi 


II. THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


PREFACE TO 1896 EDITION 

126 

i . Looking-Glass House 

129 

2. The Garden of Live Flowers 

H 3 

3. Looking-Glass Insects 

154 

4. Tweedledum and Tweedledee 

!65 

5. Wool and Water 

179 

6. Humpty Dumpty 

191 

7. The Lion and the Unicorn 

203 

8. “It’s My Own Invention” 

214 

9. Queen Alice 

229 

10. Shaking 

246 

11. Waking . 

246 

12. Which Dreamed It? 

247 


V 



Vi CONTENTS 


III. SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

PREFACE 255 

1. Less Bread! More Taxes! 264 

2. L’Amie Inconnue 271 

3. Birthday-Presents 277 

4. A Cunning Conspiracy 284 

5. A Beggar’s Palace 290 

6. The Magic Locket 298 

7. The Baron’s Embassy 305 

8. A Ride on a Lion 311 

9. A Jester and a Bear 317 

10. The Other Professor 324 

11. Peter and Paul 331 

12. A Musical Gardener 337 

13. A Visit to Dogland 345 

14. Fairy-Sylvie 352 

15. Bruno’s Revenge 363 

16. A Changed Crocodile 370 

17. The Three Badgers 376 

18. Queer Street, Number Forty 386 

19. How to Make a Phlizz 394 

20. Light Come, Light Go 402 

21. Through the Ivory Door 410 

22. Crossing the Line 421 

23. An Outlandish Watch 431 

24. The Frogs’ Birthday-Treat 439 

25. Looking Eastward 450 

IV. SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

PREFACE 461 

1. Bruno’s Lessons 473 

2. Love’s Curfew 482 

3. Streaks of Dawn 490 

4. The Dog-King 498 

5. Matilda Jane 505 

6. Willie’s Wife 513 

7. Mein Herr 519 

8. In a Shady Place 527 

9. The Farewell-Party 535 

10. Jabbering and Jam 545 

11. The Man in the Moon 553 



CONTENTS Vii 

12. Fairy-Music 560 

13. What Tottles Meant 569 

14. Bruno’s Picnic 578 

15. The Little Foxes 589 

16. Beyond These Voices 596 

17. To the* Rescue! 603 

18. A Newspaper-Cutting 613 

19. A Fairy-Duet 615 

20. Gammon and Spinach 627 

21. The Professor’s Lecture 636 

22. The Banquet 644 

23. The Pig-Tale 652 

24. The Beggar’s Return 661 

25. Life Out of Death 670 


V. VERSE 

THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 


PREFACE 677 

Fit the First 680 

(The Landing) 

Fit the Second 683 

(The Bellman’s Speech) 

Fit the Third 686 

(The Baker’s Tale) 

Fit the Fourth 688 

(The Hunting) 

Fit the Fifth 690 

(The Beaver’s Lesson) 

Fit the Sixth 694 

(The Barrister’s Dream) 

Fit the Seventh 696 

(The Banker’s Fate) 

Fit the Eighth 698 

(The Vanishing) 

EARLY VERSE 

My Faiiy 700 

Punctuality 701 

Melodies 702 

Brother and Sister 702 

Facts 703 



Vlll 


CONTENTS 


Rules and Regulations 704 

Horrors 705 

Misunderstandings 706 

As It fell upon a Day 707 

Ye Fattale Cheyse 707 

Lays of Sorrow, No. x 709 

Lays of Sorrow, No. 2 712 

The Two Brothers 716 

The Lady of the Ladle 721 

Coronach 722 

She's All my Fancy painted Him 723 

Photography Extraordinary 724 

Lays of Mystery, Imagination, and Humour, No. 1: 725 
The Palace of Humbug 

The Mock Turtle's Song (Early version) 727 

Upon the Lonely Moor 727 

Miss Jones 730 


PUZZLES FROM WONDERLAND 

Puzzles 
Solutions 


PROLOGUES TO PLAYS 


Prologue to "La Guida di Bragia” 

737 

Prologue 

737 

Prologue 

739 

PHANTASMAGORIA 


Phantasmagoria 


Canto I: The Trysting 

741 

Canto II; HysFyve Rules 

745 

Canto III: Scarmoges 

748 

Canto IV: HysNouryture 

752 

Canto V: Byclcerment 

756 

Canto VI: Discomfyture 

760 

Canto VII: Sad Souvenaunce 

764 

Echoes 

765 

A Sea'Dirge 

766 

Ye Carpette Knyghte 

768 

Hiawatha’s Photographing 

768 

Melancholetta 

772 

A Valentine 

775 


733 

735 



CONTENTS ix 

The Three Voices 776 

Theme with Variations 788 

A Game of Fives 789 

Poeta Fit, non Nascitur 790 

Size and Tears 793 

Atalanta in Camden-Town 795 

The Lang Coortin' 797 

Four Riddles 802 

Fame’s Penny-Trumpet 807 

COLLEGE RHYMES AND NOTES 

BY AN OXFORD CHIEL 

Ode to Damon 809 

Those Horrid Hurdy-Gurdies! 811 

My Fancy 811 

The Maj esty of J ustice 812 

The Elections to the Hebdomadal Council 815 

The Deserted Parks 823 

Examination Statute 826 

ACROSTICS, INSCRIPTIONS, 

AND OTHER VERSE 

Acrostic: Little maidens, when you look 827 

To three puzzled little Girls, from the Author 828 

Double Acrostic: I sing a place wherein agree 828 

Three Little Maids 830 

Puzzle 830 

Three Children 831 

Two Thieves 832 

Two Acrostics: Round the wondrous globe 832 

Maidens, if a maid you meet 833 

Double Acrostic: Two little girls near London dwell 833 
Acrostic: “Are you deaf. Father William?” 834 

Acrostic: Maidens! if you love the tale 834 

Acrostic: Love-lighted eyes, that will not start 833 

ToM.A.B. 836 

Acrostic: Maiden, though thy heart may quail 836 

Madrigal 837 

Love among the Roses 837 

Two Poems to Rachel Daniel 838 

The Lyceum 839 

Acrostic: Around my lonely hearth to-night 840 



X 


CONTENTS 


Dreamland 841 

To my Child-Friend 842 

A Riddle 842 

A Limerick 843 

Rhyme? and Reason? 843 

A Nursery Darling 843 

Maggie’s Visit to Oxford 844 

Maggie B- 848 

THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 
Three Sunsets 849 

The Path of Roses 852 

The Valley of the Shadow of Death 856 

Solitude 860 

Beatrice 861 

Stolen Waters 863 

The Willow-Tree 867 

Only a Woman’s Hair 868 

The Sailor’s Wife 870 

After Three Days 872 

Faces in the Fire 875 

A Lesson in Latin 876 

Puck Lost and Found 877 

VI. STORIES 

A Tangled Tale 883 

Novelty and Romancement 970 

A Photographer’s Day Out 979 

Wilhelm von Schmitz 986 

The Legend of Scotland 999 

VII. A MISCELLANY 

The Offer of the Clarendon Trustees 1009 

The New Method of Evaluation ion 

The Dynamics of a Parti-cle 1016 

The New Belfry of Christ Church, Oxford 1026 

The Vision of the Three T’s 1036 

The Blank Cheque io 54 

Twelve Months in a Curatorship 1060 

Three Years in a Curatorship 1064 

Resident Women-Students 1068 



CONTENTS Xi 

Some Popular Fallacies about Vivisection 1071 

Lawn Tennis Tournaments 1082 

Eight or Nine Wise Words about Letter Writing 1091 
What the Tortoise said to Achilles 1104 

The Two Clocks 1108 

Photography Extraordinary 1109 

Hints for Etiquette; or, Dining Out made Easy 1113 
A Hemispherical Problem 111 5 

A Selection from Symbolic Logic 1116 

Rules for Court Circular 1140 

Croquet Castles 1143 

Mischmasch 1146 

Doublets 1147 

A Postal Problem 1153 

The Alphabet-Cipher 1156 

Introduction to The Lost Plum Cake 1158 

INDEX OF FIRST LINES OF VERSE 1161 


As far as can be ascertained, the following pieces have 
never appeared in print except in their original editions. 
We are grateful to Mr. Morris L. Parrish for his courtesy 
in allowing us to copy them from the originals in his 
collection. 

“Resident Women-Students” 

“Some Popular Fallacies about Vivisection” 
“Lawn Tennis Tournaments” 

“Rules for Court Circular” 

“Croquet Castles” 

“Mischmasch” 

“Doublets” 

“A Postal Problem” 

“The Alphabet-Cipher” 

"Introduction to The Lost Plum Cake” 



CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE 


1845 My Fairy 

1845 Punctuality 

1845 Melodies 

1845 Brother and Sister 

1845 Facts 

1845 Rules and Regulations 

1849 Hints for Etiquette; or, Dining Out made Easy 

1849 A Hemispherical Problem 

1850 Horrors 

1850 Misunderstandings 

1850 As It fell upon a Day 

1850-1853 Ye Fattale Cheyse 
1850-1853 Lays of Sorrow, No. 1 
1850-1853 Lays of Sorrow, No. 2 
i§53 The Two Brothers 

1853 Solitude 

1854 Wilhelm von Schmitz 

1834 The Lady of the Ladle 

1854 Coronach 

1855 She’s All my Fancy painted Him 

1855 Photography Extraordinary 

1855 Lays of Mystery, Imagination, and Humour, 

No. 1: The Palace of Humbug 

1856 Upon the Lonely Moor 

1856 Ye Carpette Knyghte 

1856 The Three Voices 

1856 The Path of Roses 

1856 Novelty and Romancement 
1856-1860 The Legend of Scotland 

1857 Hiawatha’s Photographing 

1857 The Sailor’s Wife 

1859 The Willow-Tree 

1860 Faces in the Fire 

1860 A Photographer’s Day Out 

i860 Rules for Court Circular 

1860 A Valentine 
1860-1863 Poeta Fit, non Nascitur 

1861 A Sea Dirge 


xn 



CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE 


Xlll 


1861 Ode to Damon 

1861 Those Horrid Hurdy-Gurdies! 

1861 Acrostic: Little maidens, when you look 

1861 Three Sunsets 

1861 After Three Days 

1862 My Fancy 

1862 Beatrice 

1862 Stolen W aters 

1862 Only a Woman’s Hair 

i 862 The Mock Turtle's Song (Early version) 

1863 Croquet Castles 

1863 Size and Tears 

1863 The Maj esty of J ustice 

1864 Examination Statute 

1865 The New Method of Evaluation 

1865 The Dynamics of a Parti-cle 

1865 Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland 

1866 The Elections to the Hebdomadal Council 

1867 The Deserted Parks 

1868 The Valley of the Shadow of Death 

1868 The Offer of the Clarendon Trustees 

1868 The Alphabet-Cipher 

1869 Phantasmagoria 

1869 Melancholetta 

1869 Theme with Variations 

1869 Atalanta in Camden Town 

1869 The Lang Coortin' 

1869 To three puzzled little Girls, from the Author 

1869 Double Acrostic: I sing a place wherein agree 

1869 Three Little Maids 

1870 Puzzles from Wonderland 

1871 Prologue (p. 737) 

1871 Prologue to “La Guida di Bragia” 

1871 Three Children 

1872 Two Thieves 

1872 The New Belfry of Christ Church, Oxford 

1872 Through the Looking-Glass 

1873 Prologue (p. 740) 

1873 The Vision of the Three T’s 

1874 The Blank Cheque 

1875 Some Popular Fallacies about Vivisection 

1876 The Hunting of the Snark 



Xiv CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE 

1876 Fame’s Penny-Trumpet 

1876 Acrostic: ‘ ‘ Are you deaf, Father William? 

1876 Acrostic: Maidens! if you love the tale 
1876 Acrostic: Love-lighted eyes, that will not start 

1876 Acrostic: Maiden, though thy heart may quail 

1877 Madrigal 

1878 Love among the Roses 

1879 Doublets 

1880 A Tangled Tale 

1880, 1881 Two Poems to Rachel Daniel 

1881 The Lyceum 

1882 Dreamland 

1882 Mischmasch 

1883 Echoes 

1883 A Game of Fives 

1883 Rhyme? and Reason? 

1883 Lawn Tennis Tournaments 

1884 Twelve Months in a Curatorship 

1886 To my Child-Friend 

1886 Three Years in a Curatorship 

1888 A Lesson in Latin 

1889 Sylvie and Bruno 

1889 A Nursery Darling 

1889 Maggie’s Visit to Oxford 

1890 Eight or Nine Wise Words about Letter Writing 

1891 Maggie B- 

1891 Puck Lost and Found 

1891 A Postal Problem 

1893 Sylvie and Bruno Concluded 

1894 What the Tortoise said to Achilles 

1895 A Selection from Symbolic Logic 

1896 Resident Women-Students 

1897 Introduction to The Lost Plum Cake 

N.D. Miss Jones 

N.D. Four Riddles (p. 802) 

N.D. Puzzle (p. 830) 

N.D. Acrostics : Round the wondrous globe 

Maidens, if a maid you meet 
Around my lonely hearth to-night 
N.D. A Riddle (p. 842) 

N.D. A Limerick (p. 843) 

N.D. ToM.A.B. 



THE COMPLETE WORKS 

OF 

LEWIS CARROLL 




I 

Alice’s Adventures 

in 

Wonderland 







All in the golden afternoon 
Full leisurely we glide; 

For both our oars, with little skill, 

By little arms are plied, 

While little hands make vain pretence 
Our wanderings to guide. 

) 

Ah, cruel Three! In such an hour, 

Beneath such dreamy weather, 

To beg a tale of breath too weak 
To stir the tiniest feather! 

Yet what can one poor voice avail 
Against three tongues together? 

Imperious Prima flashes forth 
Her edict “to begin it”: 

In gentler tones Secunda hopes 
“There will be nonsense in it!” 

While Tertia interrupts the tale 
Not more than once a minute. 

Anon, to sudden silence won, 

In fancy they pursue 
The dream-child moving through a land 
Of wonders wild and new, 

In friendly chat with bird or beast— 

And half believe it true. 

And ever, as the story drained 
The wells of fancy dry, 

And faintly strove that weary one 
To put the subject by, 

"The rest next time—” “It is next time!” 
The happy voices cry. 


ii 



Thus grew the, tale of Wonderland: 

Thus slowly, one by one, 

Its quaint events were hammered out— 
And now the tale is done, 

And home we steer, a merry crew, 

Beneath the setting sun. 

Alice! A childish story take, 

And, with a gentle hand, 

Lay it where Childhood’s dreams are twined 
In Memory’s mystic band. 

Like pilgrim’s wither’d wreath of flowers 
Pluck’d in a far-off land. 


12 



CHRISTMAS-GREETINGS 


[from a fairy to a child] 

Lady dear, if Fairies may 
For a moment lay aside 

Cunning tricks and elfish play, 

Tis at happy Christmas-tide. 

We have heard the children say— 
Gentle children, whom we love— 

Long ago, on Christmas-Day, 

Came a message from above. 

Still, as Christmas-tide comes round, 
They remember it again— 

Echo still the joyful sound 

“Peace on earth, good-will to men!” 

Yet the hearts must child-like be 
Where such heavenly guests abide; 

Unto children, in their glee. 

All the year is Christmas-tide. 

Thus, forgetting tricks and play 
For a moment, Lady dear, 

We would wish you, if we may, 

Merry Christmas, glad New Year! 

Christmas, 1867. 


13 










































Chapter I 

Down the Rabbit-Hole 

Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her 
sister on the bank and of having nothing to do: once or 
twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading, 
but it had no pictures or conversations in it, “and what is 
the use of a book”, thought Alice, “without pictures or 
conversations?” 

So she was considering, in her own mind (as well as 
she could, for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and 
stupid), whether the pleasure of making a daisy-chain 
would be worth the trouble of getting up and picking the 
daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes 
ran close by her. 


15 



16 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

There was nothing so very remarkable in that; nor did 
Alice think it so very much out of the way to hear the 
Rabbit say to itself “Oh dear! Oh dear! I shall be too 
late!” (when she thought it over afterwards it occurred 
to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the 
time it all seemed quite natural); but, when the Rabbit 
actually took a watch out of its waistcoat-pocket, and looked 
at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to her feet, for it 
flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a 
rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to take 
out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the 
field after it, and was just in time to see it pop down a 
large rabbit-hole under the hedge. 

In another moment down went Alice after it, never 
once considering how in the world she was to get out 
again. 

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some 
way, and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that 
Alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself 
before she found herself falling down what seemed to be 
a very deep well. 

Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, 
for she had plenty of time as she went down to look 
about her, and to wonder what was going to happen next. 
First, she tried to look down and make out what she was 
coming to, but it was too dark to see anything: then she 
looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were 
filled with cupboards and book-shelves: here and there 
she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs. She took 
down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed: it was 
labelled “ORANGE MARMALADE” but to her great 
disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop 
the jar, for fear of killing somebody underneath, so man¬ 
aged to put it into one of the cupboards as she fell 
past it. 

“Well!” thought Alice to herself. “After such a fall as 
this, I shall think nothing of tumbling down-stairs! How 
brave they’ll all think me at home! Why, I wouldn’t say 



DOWN THE RABBIT-HOLE 17 

anything about it, even if I fell off the top of the house!” 
(Which was very likely true.) 

Down, down, down. Would the fall never come to 
an end? “I wonder how many miles I’ve fallen by this 
time?” she said aloud. “I must be getting somewhere near 
the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would be four 
thousand miles down, I think—” (for, you see, Alice had 
learnt several things of this sort in her lessons in the 
school-room, and though this was not a very good oppor¬ 
tunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no 
one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) 
“—yes, that’s about the right distance—but then I won¬ 
der what Latitude or Longitude I’ve got to?” (Alice had 
not the slightest idea what Latitude was, or Longitude 
either, but she thought they were nice grand words to say.) 

Presently she began again. "I wonder if I shall fall right 
through the earth! How funny it’ll seem to come out 
among the people that walk with their heads downwards! 
The antipathies, I think—” (she was rather glad there 
was no one listening, this time, as it didn’t sound at all 
the right word) “—but I shall have to ask them what the 
name of the country is, you know. Please, Ma’am, is this 
New Zealand? Or Australia?” (and she tried to curtsey 
as she spoke—fancy, curtseying as you’re falling through 
the air! Do you think you could manage it?) “And what 
an ignorant little girl she’ll think me for asking! No, it'll 
never do to ask: perhaps I shall see it written up some¬ 
where.” 

Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so 
Alice soon began talking again. “Dinah’U miss me very 
much to-night, I should think!” (Dinah was the cat.) “I 
hope they’ll remember her saucer of milk at tea-time. 
Dinah, my dear! I wish you were down here with me! 
There are no mice in the air, I’m afraid, but you might 
catch a bat, and that’s very like a mouse, you know. But 
do cats eat bats, I wonder?” And here Alice began to get 
rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy 
sort of way, “Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?” and 

B L.C. 



18 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

sometimes "Do bats eat cats?” for, you see, as she couldn’t 
answer either question, it didn’t much matter which 
way she put it. She felt that she was dozing off, and had 
just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand 
with Dinah, and was saying to her, very earnestly, "Now, 
Dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?” when 
suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of 
sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over. 



Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her 
feet in a moment: she looked up, but it was all dark over¬ 
head: before her was another long passage, and the White 
Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it. There was not 
a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and 
was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, "Oh 
my ears and whiskers, how late it’s getting!” She was 
close behind it when she turned the corner, but the 
Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found herself in a 
long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging 
from the roof. 

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all 
locked; and when Alice had been all the way down one 



DOWN THE RABBIT-HOLE ig 

side and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly 
down the middle, wondering how she was ever to get out 
again. 

Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all 
made of solid glass: there was nothing on it but a tiny 
golden key, and Alice’s first idea was that this might be¬ 
long to one of the doors of the hall; but, alas! either the 
locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at any 
rate it would not open any of them. However, on the 
second time round, she came upon a low curtain she had 
not noticed before, and behind it was a little door about 
fifteen inches high: she tried the little golden key in the 
lock, and to her great delight it fitted! 

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small 
passage, not much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down 
and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden 
you ever saw. How she longed to get out of that dark hall, 
and wander about among those beds of bright flowers 
and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her 
head through the doorway; “and even if my head would 
go through”, thought poor Alice, “it would be of very 
little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could 
shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only knew 
how to begin.” For, you see, so many out-of-the-way 
things had happened lately, that Alice had begun to think 
that very few things indeed were really impossible. 

There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, 
so she went back to the table, half hoping she might find 
another key on it, or at any rate a book of rules for shut¬ 
ting people up like telescopes: this time she found a little 
bottle on it (“which certainly was not here before”, said 
Alice), and tied around the neck of the bottle was a paper 
label, with the words “DRINK ME” beautifully printed 
on it in large letters. 

It was all very well to say “Drink me”, but the wise 
little Alice was not going to do that in a hurry. “No, I’ll 
look first”, she said, “and see whether it’s marked ‘ poison ’ 
or not”; for she had read several nice little stories about 



20 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts, 
and other unpleasant things, all because they would not 
remember the simple rules their friends had taught them: 
such as, that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it 
too long; and that, if you cut your finger very deeply with 
a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never forgotten 



that, if you drink much from a bottle marked “poison”, 
it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later. 

However, this bottle was not marked “poison”, so 
Alice ventured to taste it, and, finding it very nice (it had, 
in fact, a sort of mixed flavour of cherry-tart, custard, 
pineapple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast), 
she very soon finished it off. 

4c * * * 

* * * 

4c 4c 


4c 


4c 



DOWN THE RABBIT-HOLE 21 

“What a curious feeling!” said Alice. “I must be shut¬ 
ting up like a telescope!” 

And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches 
high, and her face brightened up at the thought that she 
was now the right size for going through the little door 
into that lovely garden. First, however, she waited for a 
few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further: 
she felt a little nervous about this; “for it might end, you 
know”, said Alice to herself, “in my going out altogether, 
like a candle. I wonder what I should be like then?” And 
she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle looks like 
after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember 
ever having seen such a thing. 

After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she 
decided on going into the garden at once; but, alas for 
poor Alice! when she got to the. door, she found she had 
forgotten the little golden key, and when she went back 
to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach 
it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she 
tried her best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but 
it was too slippery; and when she had tired herself out 
with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried. 

“Come, there's no use in crying like that!” said Alice to 
herself rather sharply. “I advise you to leave off this 
minute!” She generally gave herself very good advice 
(though she very seldom followed it), and sometimes she 
scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her eyes; 
and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for 
having cheated herself in a game of croquet she was 
playing against herself, for this curious child was very 
fond of pretending to be two people. "But it’s no use 
now”, thought poor Alice, “to pretend to be two people! 
Why, there’s hardly enough of me left to make one 
respectable person!” 

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying 
under the table: she opened it, and found in it a very 
small cake, on which the words “EAT ME” were beauti¬ 
fully marked in currants. “Well, I’ll eat it,” said Alice, 



22 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

"and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and 
if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door: 
so either way I’ll get into the garden, and I don’t care 
which happens!” 

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself "Which 
way? Which way?”, holding her hand on the top of her 
head to feel which way it was growing; and she was quite 
surprised to find that she remained the same size. To be 
sure, this is what generally happens when one eats cake; 
but Alice had got so much into the way of expecting 
nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen, that it 
seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the 
common way. 

So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake. 



Chapter II 

The Pool of Tears 

"Curiouser and curious- 
er!” cried Alice (she was so 
much surprised, that for the 
moment she quite forgot how 
to speak good English). 

“Now, I’m opening out like 
the largest telescope that 
ever was! Good-bye, feet!” 

(for when she looked down 
at her feet, they seemed to 
be almost out of sight, they 
were getting so far off). “Oh, 
my poor little feet, I won¬ 
der who will put on your 
shoes and stockings for you 
now, dears? I’m sure I 
sha’n’t be able! I shall be a 
great deal too far ofT to 
trouble myself about you: 
you must manage the best 
way you can—but I must be 
kind to them”, thought Alice, 

‘ ‘or perhaps they wo’n’t walk 
the way I want to go! Let me 
see, I’ll give them a new pair 
of boots every Christmas.” 

And she went on planning to herself how she would 
manage it. “They must go by the carrier,” she thought; 
“and how funny it’ll seem, sending presents to one’s own 
feet! And how odd the directions will look! 

Alice’s Right Foot, Esq. 

Hearthrug, 

near the Fender, 

{with A lice’s love). 

Oh dear, what nonsense I’m talking! ” 

23 





24 ALICE’S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND 

Just at this moment her head struck against the roof of 
the hall: in fact she was now rather more than nine feet 
high, and she at once took up the little golden key and 
hurried off to the garden door. 

Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down 
on one side, to look through into the garden with one eye; 
but to get through was more hopeless than ever: she sat 
down and began to cry again. 

“You ought to be ashamed of yourself,” said Alice, "a 
great girl like you”, (she might well say this), “to go on 
crying in this way! Stop this moment, I tell you!” But she 
went on all the same, shedding gallons of tears, until 
there was a large pool around her, about four inches deep, 
and reaching half down the hall. 

After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the 
distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was 
coming. It was the White Rabbit returning splendidly 
dressed, with a pair of white kid-gloves in one hand and a 
large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a great 
hurry, muttering to himself, as he came, “Oh! The 
Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! Wo’rit she be savage if I’ve 
kept her waiting!” Alice felt so desperate that she was 
ready to ask help of any one: so, when the Rabbit came 
near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, “If you please, 

Sir-” The Rabbit started violently, dropped the 

white kid-gloves and the fan, and scurried away into the 
darkness as hard as he could go. 

Alice took up the fan and gloves and, as the hall was 
very hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on 
talking. “Dear, dear! How queer everything is to-day! 
And yesterday things went on just as usual, I wonder if 
I’ve changed in the night? Let me think: was I the same 
when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remem¬ 
ber feeling a little different. But if I’m not the same, the 
next question is ‘Who in the world am I?’ Ah, that’s the 
great puzzle!” And she began thinking over all the chil¬ 
dren she knew that were of the same age as herself, to see 
if she could have been changed for any of them. 



THE POOL OF TEARS 


25 



"I’m sure I’m not Ada,” she said, "for her hair goes in 
such long ringlets, and mine doesn’t go in ringlets at all; 
and I’m sure I ca'n’t be Mabel, for I know all sorts of 
things, and she, oh, she knows such a very little! Besides, 
she’s she, and I’m I, and—oh dear, how puzzling it all is! 
I’ll try if I know all the things I used to know. Let me 
see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, 
and four times seven is—oh dear! I shall never get to 
twenty at that rate! However, the Multiplication-Table 
doesn’t signify: let’s try Geography. London is the capital 
of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome, and Rome—no, 
































26 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

that's all wrong, I’m certain! I must have been changed 

for Mabel! I’ll try and say ‘How doth the little -’,” and 

she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying 
lessons, and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded 
hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the same 
as they used to do: 

"How doth the little crocodile 
Improve his shining tail, 

A nd pour the waters of the Nile 
On every golden scale! 

“How cheerfully he seems to grin. 

How neatly spreads his claws, 

And welcomes little fishes in. 

With gently smiling jaws! 

“I’m sure those are not the right words,” said poor 
Alice, and her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, 
“I must be Mabel after all, and I shall have to go and live 
in that poky little house, and have next to no toys to play 
with, and oh, ever so many lessons to learn! No, I’ve 
made up my mind about it: if I’m Mabel, I’ll stay down 
here! It’ll be no use their putting their heads down and 
saying ‘Come up again, dear!' I shall only look up and say 
‘Who am I, then? Tell me that first, and then, if I like 
being that person, I’ll come up: if not. I’ll stay down here 
till I’m somebody else’—but, oh dear!” cried Alice, with 
a sudden burst of tears, "I do wish they would put their 
heads down! I am so very tired of being all alone here!” 

As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was 
surprised to see that she had put on one of the Rabbit’s 
little white kid-gloves while she was talking. “How can 
I have done that?” she thought. “I must be growing 
small again.” She got up and went to the table to measure 
herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, 
she was now about two feet high, and was going on 
shrinking rapidly: she soon found out that the cause of 
this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it 



THE POOL OF TEARS 2 7 

hastily, just in time to save herself from shrinking away 
altogether. 

“That was a narrow escape!” said Alice, a good deal 
frightened at the sudden change, but very glad to find 
herself still in existence. “And now for the garden!” And 
she ran with all speed back to the little door; but, alas! 
the little door was shut again, and the little golden key 
was lying on the glass table as before, “and things are 



worse than ever,” thought the poor child, “for I never was 
so small as this before, never! And I declare it’s too bad, 
that it is!” 

As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another 
moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt-water. 
Her first idea was that she had somehow fallen into the 
sea, “and in that case I can go back by railway,” she said 
to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once in her life, 
and had come to the general conclusion that wherever 
you go to on the English coast, you find a number of 
bathing-machines in the sea, some children digging in the 
sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging-houses, 
and behind them a railway station.) However, she soon 
made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had 
wept when she was nine feet high. 



28 ALICE’S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND 


“I wish I hadn’t cried so much!” said Alice, as she 
swam about, trying to find her way out. “I shall be pun¬ 
ished for it now, I suppose, by being drowned in my own 
tears! That will be a queer thing, to be sure! However, 
everything is queer to-day.” 

Just then she heard something splashing about in the 
pool a little way off, and she swam nearer to make out 
what it was: at first she thought it must be a walrus or 



hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small she 
was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse, 
that had slipped in like herself. 

“Would it be of any use, now,” thought Alice, “to 
speak to this mouse? Everything is so out-of-the-way 
down here, that I should think very likely it can talk: at 
any rate, there’s no harm in trying.” So she began: “O 
Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very 
tired of swimming about here, O Mouse!” (Alice thought 
this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse: she 
had never done such a thing before, but she remembered 
having seen, in her brother’s Latin Grammar, “A mouse 
—of a mouse—to a mouse—a mouse—O mouse!”) The 




























THE POOL OF TEARS 


29 

mouse looked at her rather inquisitively, and seemed to 
her to wink with one of its little eyes, but it said nothing. 

“Perhaps it doesn’t understand English,” thought 
Alice. "I daresay it’s a French mouse, come over with 
William the Conqueror.” (For, with all her knowledge of 
history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago any¬ 
thing had happened.) So she began again: “Ou est ma 
chatte?” which was the first sentence in her French 
lesson-book. The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the 
water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright. “Oh, I 
beg your pardon!” cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had 
hurt the poor animal’s feelings. “I quite forgot you 
didn’t like cats.” 

“Not like cats!” cried the Mouse in a shrill passionate 
voice. “Would you like cats, if you were me?” 

“Well, perhaps not,” said Alice in a soothing tone: 
“don’t be angry about it. And yet I wish I could show you 
our cat Dinah. I think you’d take a fancy to cats, if you 
could only see her. She is such a dear quiet thing”, Alice 
went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the 
pool, “and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her 
paws and washing her face—and she is such a nice soft 
thing to nurse—and she’s such a capital one for catching 
mice—oh, I beg your pardon!” cried Alice again, for this 
time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt certain 
it must be really offended. “We won't talk about her any 
more if you’d rather not.” 

“We, indeed!” cried the Mouse, who was trembling 
down to the end of its tail. “As if I would talk on such a 
subject! Our family always hated cats: nasty, low, vulgar 
things! Don’t let me hear the name again!” 

“I wo’n’t indeed!” said Alice, in a great hurry to change 
the subject of conversation. "Are you—are you fond—of 
—of dogs?” The Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on 
eagerly: “There is such a nice little dog, near our house, I 
should like to show you! A little bright-eyed terrier, you 
know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it’ll 
fetch things when you throw them, and it’ll sit up .and 



30 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

beg for its dinner, and all sorts of things—I ca’n’t remem¬ 
ber half of them—and it belongs to a farmer, you know, 
and he says it’s so useful, it’s worth a hundred pounds! 
He says it kills all the rats and—oh dear!” cried Alice in a 
sorrowful tone. “I’m afraid I’ve offended it again!” For 
the Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it 
could go, and making quite a commotion in the pool as it 
went. 

So she called softly after it, “Mouse dear! Do come back 
again, and we wo’n’t talk about cats, or dogs either, if you 
don’t like them!” When the Mouse heard this, it turned 
round and swam slowly back to her: its face was quite 
pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said, in a low 
trembling voice, “Let us get to the shore, and then I’ll 
tell you my history, and you’ll understand why it is I hate 
cats and dogs.” 

It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite 
crowded with the birds and animals that had fallen into 
it: there was a Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, 
and several other curious creatures. Alice led the way, and 
the whole party swam to the shore. 



Chapter III 


A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale 

They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled 
on the bank—the birds with draggled feathers, the 
animals with their fur clinging close to them, and all 
dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable. 

The first question of course was, how to get dry again: 
they had a consultation about this, and after a few 
minutes it seemed quite natural to Alice to find herself 
talking familiarly with them, as if she had known them 
all her fife. Indeed, she had quite a long argument with 
the Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, 
“I'm older than you, and must know better." And this 
Alice would not allow, without knowing how old it was, 
and as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there 
was no more to be said. 


31 



32 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of some 
authority among them, called out "Sit down, all of you, 
and listen to me! I'll soon make you dry enough!” They 
all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the Mouse in 
the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for 
she felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get 
dry very soon. 

"Ahem!” said the Mouse with an important air. "Are 
you all ready? This is the driest thing I know. Silence all 
round, if' you please! ‘William the Conqueror, whose 
cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted 
to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been 
of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest. 
Edwin and Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northum¬ 
bria-’ ” 

"Ugh!” said the Lory, with a shiver. 

"I beg your pardon!” said the Mouse, frowning, but 
very politely. “Did you speak?” 

"Not I!” said the Lory, hastily. 

"I thought you did,” said the Mouse. “I proceed. ‘Ed¬ 
win and Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, 
declared for him; and even Stigand, the patriotic arch¬ 
bishop of Canterbury, found it advisable-’ ” 

"Found what}” said the Duck. 

"Found it” the Mouse replied rather crossly: “of 
course you know what ‘it’ means.” 

“I know what ‘it’ means well enough, when I find a 
thing,” said the Duck: “it’s generally a frog, or a worm. 
The question is, what did the archbishop find?” 

The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly 
went on, " ‘—found it advisable to go with Edgar Athel- 
ing to meet William and-offer him the crown. William’s 
conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence of his 

Normans-’ How are you getting on now, my dear?” 

it continued, turning to Alice as it spoke. 

"As wet as ever,” said Alice in a melancholy tone: "it 
doesn’t seem to dry me at all.” 

"In that case,” said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its 



A CAUCUS-RACE AND A LONG TALE 33 

feet, “I move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate 
adoption of more energetic remedies-” 

“Speak English!” said the Eaglet. “I don’t know the 
meaning of half those long words, and, what’s more, I 
don’t believe you do either!” And the Eaglet bent down 
its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds tittered 
audibly. 

“What I was going to say”, said the Dodo in an 
offended tone, “was, that the best thing to get us dry 
would be a Caucus-race.” 

“What is a Caucus-race? ” said Alice; not that she much 
wanted to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought 
that somebody ought to speak, and no one else seemed in¬ 
clined to say anything. 

“Why,” said the Dodo, “the best way to explain it is to 
do it.” (And, as you might like to try the thing yourself 
some winter-day, I will tell you how the Dodo managed 
it.) 

First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, 
(“the exact shape doesn’t matter,” it said,) and then all 
the party were placed along the course, here and there. 
There was no “One, two, three, and away!” but they be¬ 
gan running when they liked, and left off when they 
liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was 
over. However, when they had been running half an hour 
or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo suddenly called 
out “The race is over!” and they all crowded round it, 
panting, and asking “But who has won?” 

This question the Dodo could not answer without a 
great deal of thought, and it stood for a long time 
with one finger pressed upon its forehead (the posi¬ 
tion in which you usually see Shakespeare, in the pic¬ 
tures of him), while the rest waited in silence. At last 
the Dodo said “Everybody has won, and all must have 
prizes.” 

"But who is to give the prizes?” quite a chorus of voices 
asked. 

“Why, she, of course,” said the Dodo, pointing to Alice 



34 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

with one finger; and the whole party at once crowded 
round her, calling out, in a confused way, “Prizes! 
Prizes!” 

Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her 
hand in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits (luck¬ 
ily the salt-water had not got into it), and handed them 
round as prizes. There was exactly one a-piece, all round. 

“But she must have a prize herself, you know,” said the 
Mouse. 

“Of course,” the Dodo replied very gravely. “What else 
have you got in your pocket?” it went on, turning to 
Alice. 

“Only a thimble,” said Alice sadly. 

“Hand it over here,” said the Dodo. 

Then they all crowded round her once more, while the 
Dodo solemnly presented the thimble, saying “We beg 
your acceptance of this elegant thimble”; and, when it 
had finished this short speech, they all cheered. 

Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all 
looked so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as 
she could not think of anything to say, she simply bowed, 
and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she could. 

The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some 
noise and confusion, as the large birds complained that 
they could not taste theirs, and the small ones choked and 
had to be patted on the back. However, it was over at 
last, and they sat down again in a ring, and begged the 
Mouse to tell them something more. 

“You promised to tell me your history, you know,” 
said Alice, “and why it is you hate—C and D,” she added 
in a whisper, half afraid that it would be offended again. 

“Mine is a long and a sad tale!” said the Mouse, turning 
to Alice, and sighing. 

“It is a long tail, certainly,” said Alice, looking down 
with wonder at the Mouse’s tail; “but why do you call it 
sad?” And she kept on puzzling about it while the Mouse 
was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was something 
like this: 



A CAUCUS-RACE AND A LONG TALE 

“Fury said to 
a mouse, That 
he met in the 
house, ‘Let 
us both go 
to law: I 
will prose¬ 
cute you. 

Come, I’ll 
take no de¬ 
nial; We 
must have 
a trial: 

For really 
this morn¬ 
ing I’ve 
nothing 
to do.’ 

Said the 
mouse to 
the cur, 

‘Such a 
trial, dear 
Sir, With 
no jury 
or judge, 
would 
be wast¬ 
ing our 
breath.’ 

‘I’ll be 
judge, 

I’llbe 

jury,’ 

Said 

cun¬ 

ning 

old 

Fury: 

‘I’ll 

try 

the 
whole 
cause, 
and 
con¬ 
demn 
yon to 
death. * ” 


35 



36 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 



“You are not attending!” said the Mouse to Alice, 
severely. “What are you thinking of?” 

“I beg your pardon,” said Alice very humbly: “you had 
got to the fifth bend, I think?” 

“I had not \” cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily. 

“A knot!” said Alice, always ready to make herself use¬ 
ful, and looking anxiously about her. “Oh, do let me help 
to undo it!” 

“I shall do nothing of the sort,” said the Mouse, getting 
up and walking away. “You insult me by talking such 
nonsense!” 

“I didn’t mean it!” pleaded poor Alice. “But you’re so 
easily offended, you know!” 

The Mouse only growled in reply. 










A CAUCUS-RACE AND A LONG TALE 37 

“Please come back, and finish your story!” Alice called 
after it. And the others all joined in chorus “Yes, please 
do!” But the Mouse only shook its head impatiently, and 
walked a little quicker. 

“What a pity it wouldn’t stay!” sighed the Lory, as 
soon as it was quite out of sight. And an old Crab took the 
opportunity of saying to her daughter “Ah, my dear! Let 
this be a lesson to you never to lose your temper!” “Hold 
your tongue, Ma!” said the young Crab, a little snappishly. 
“You’re enough to try the patience of an oyster!” 

“I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!” said Alice 
aloud, addressing nobody in particular. " She'd soon fetch 
it back!” 

“And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the ques¬ 
tion?” said the Lory. 

Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk 
about her pet: “Dinah’s our cat. And she’s such a capital 
one for catching mice, you ca’n’t think! And oh, I wish 
you could see her after the birds! Why, she’ll eat a little 
bird as soon as look at it!” 

This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the 
party. Some of the birds hurried off at once: one old Mag¬ 
pie began wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking 
“I really must be getting home: the night-air doesn’t suit 
my throat!” And a Canary called out in a trembling voice, 
to its children, “Come away, my dears! It’s high time you 
were all in bed!” On various pretexts they all moved off, 
and Alice was soon left alone. 

“I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah!” she said to herself 
in a melancholy tone. "Nobody seems to like her, down 
here, and I’m sure she’s the best cat in the world! Oh, my 
dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you any more!” 
And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very 
lonely and low-spirited. In a little while, however, she 
again heard a little pattering of footsteps in the distance; 
and she looked up eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse 
had changed his mind, and was coming back to finish his 
story. 



38 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

Chapter IV 

The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill 

It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and 
looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost some¬ 
thing; and she heard it muttering to itself, “The Duchess! 
The Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh my fur and whiskers! 
She’ll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets! 
Where can I have dropped them, I wonder?” Alice 
guessed in a moment that it was looking for the fan and 
the pair of white kid-gloves, and she very good-naturedly 
began hunting about for them, but they were nowhere to 
be seen—everything seemed to have changed since her 
swim in the pool; and the great hall, with the glass table 
and the little door, had vanished completely. 

Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunt¬ 
ing about, and called out to her, in an angry tone, “Why, 
Mary Ann, what are you doing out here? Run home this 
moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan! Quick, 
now!” And Alice was so much frightened that she ran 
off at once in the direction it pointed to, without trying to 
explain the mistake that it had made. 

“He took me for his housemaid,” she said to herself as 
she ran. “How surprised he’ll be when he finds out who 
I am! But I’d better take him his fan and gloves—that is, 
if I can find them.” As she said this, she came upon a neat 
little house, on the door of which was a bright brass plate 
with the name “W. RABBIT” engraved upon it. She 
went in without knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great 
fear lest she should meet the real Mary Ann, and be 
turned out of the house before she had found the fan and 
gloves. 

“How queer it seems”, Alice said to herself, “to be 
going messages for a rabbit! I suppose Dinah’ll be sending 
me on messages next!” and she began fancying the sort of 
thing that would happen: “ ‘Miss Alice! Come here 



THE RABBIT SENDS IN A LITTLE BILL 39 

directly, and get ready for your walk!’ ‘Coming in a 
minute, nurse! But I’ve got to watch this mouse-hole till 
Dinah comes back, and see that the mouse doesn’t get 
out.’ Only I don’t think”, Alice went on, "that they’d let 
Dinah stop in the house if it began ordering people about 
like that!” 

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little 
room with a table in the window, and on it (as she had 
hoped) a fan and two or three pairs of tiny white kid- 
gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves, and 
was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon 
a little bottle that stood near the looking-glass ; There was 
no label this time with the words "BRINK ME”, but 
nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips. "I 
know something interesting is sure to happen”, she said to 
herself, "whenever I eat or drink anything: so I’ll just see 
what this bottle does. I do hope it’ll make me grow large 
again, for really I’m quite tired of being such a tiny little 
thing!” 

It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had ex¬ 
pected: before she had drunk half the bottle, she found 
her head pressing against the ceiling, and had to stoop 
to save her neck from being broken. She hastily put 
down the bottle, saying to herself "That’s quite enough 
—I hope I sha’n’t grow any more—As it is, I ca’n’t 
get out at the door—I do wish I hadn’t drunk quite so 
much!” 

Alas! It was too late to wish that! She went on growing, 
and growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the 
floor: in another minute there was not even room for 
this, and she tried the effect of lying down with one elbow 
against the door, and the other arm curled round her 
head. Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, 
she put one arm out of the window, and one foot up the 
chimney, and said to herself “Now I can do no more, 
whatever happens. What will become of me?” 

Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had 
its full effect, and she grew no larger: still it was very 



40 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

uncomfortable, and, as there seemed to be no sort of 
chance of her ever getting out of the room again, no 
wonder she felt unhappy. 

“It was much pleasanter at home”, thought poor Alice, 
“when one wasn’t always growing larger and smaller, and 
being ordered about by mice and rabbits. I almost wish I 
hadn’t gone down that rabbit-hole—and yet—and yet— 
it’s rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I do wonder 



what can have happened to me! When I used to read 
fairy tales, I fancied that kind of thing never happened, 
and now here I am in the middle of one! There ought to 
be a book written about me, that there ought! And when 
I grow up, I'll write one—but I’m grown up now,” she 
added in a sorrowful tone: “at least there’s no room to 
grow up any more here” 

“But then”, thought Alice, “shall I never get any older 
than I am now? That’ll be a comfort, one way—never to 
be an old woman—but then—always to have lessons to 
learn! Oh, I shouldn’t like that\” 

“Oh, you foolish Alice!” she answered herself. “How 












THE RABBIT SENDS IN A LITTLE BILL 41 

can you learn lessons in here? Why, there’s hardly room 
for you, and no room at all for any lesson-books!” 

And so she went on, taking first one side and then the 
other, and making quite a conversation of it altogether; 



but after a few minutes she heard a voice outside, and 
stopped to listen. 

“Mary Ann! Mary Ann!” said the voice. “Fetch me my 
gloves this moment!” Then came a little pattering of feet 
on the stairs. Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look 
for her, and she trembled till she shook the house, quite 
forgetting that she was now about a thousand times 
as large as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid 
of it. 

Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to 
open it; but, as the door opened inwards, and Alice's 
elbow was pressed hard against it, that attempt proved a 



42 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

failure. Alice heard it say to itself “Then I'll go round and 
get in at the window.” 

“That you wo’n’t!” thought Alice, and, after waiting till 
she fancied she heard the Rabbit just under the window, 
she suddenly spread out her hand, and made a snatch in 
the air. She did not get hold of anything, but she heard a 
little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass, from 
which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen 
into a cucumber-frame, or something of the sort. 

Next came an angry voice—the Rabbit’s—“Pat! Pat! 
Where are you?” And then a voice she had never heard 
before, “Sure then I’m here! Digging for apples, yer 
honour!” 

“Digging for apples, indeed!” said tlie Rabbit angrily. 
“Here! Come help me out of thisl” (Sounds of more 
broken glass.) 

“Now tell me, Pat, what’s that in the window?” 

“Sure, it’s an arm, yer honour!” (He pronounced it 
“arrum”.) 

“An arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, 
it fills the whole window!” 

“Sure, it does, yer honour: but it’s an arm for all that.” 

“Well, it’s got no business there, at any rate: go and 
take it away!” 

There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only 
hear whispers now and then; such as “Sure, I don't like 
it, yer honour, at all, at all!” “Do as I tell you, you 
coward!” and at last she spread out her hand again, and 
made another snatch in the air. This time there were two 
little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. “What a 
number of cucumber-frames there must be!” thought 
Alice. “I wonder what they’ll do next! As for pulling me 
out of the window, I only wish they couldl I’m sure I 
don’t want to stay in here any longer!” 

She waited for some time without hearing anything 
more: at last came a rumbling of little cart-wheels, and 
the sound of a good many voices all talking together: she 
made out the words: “Where’s the other ladder?—Why, 



THE RABBIT SENDS IN A LITTLE BILL 43 


I hadn’t to bring but one. 
Bill’s got the other—Bill! Fetch 
it here, lad!—Here, put ’em up 
at this comer—No, tie ’em to¬ 
gether first—they don’t reach 
half high enough yet—Oh, 
they’ll do well enough. Don’t 
be particular—Here, Bill! Catch 
hold of this rope—Will the roof 
bear?—Mind that loose slate— 
Oh, it’s coming down! Heads 
below!” (a loud crash)— 
“Now, who did that?—It was 
Bill, I fancy—Who’s to go 
down the chimney?—Nay, I 
sha’n’t! You do it !—That I 
wo’n’t, then!—Bill’s got to go 
down—Here, Bill! The master 
says you've got to go down 
the chimney!” 

“Oh! So Bill’s got to come 
down the chimney, has he?” 
said Alice to herself. "Why, 
they seem to put everything 
upon Bill! I wouldn’t be in 
Bill’s place for a good deal; this 
fireplace is narrow, to be sure; 
but I think I can kick a little!” 



She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, 
and waited till she heard a little animal (she couldn’t 
guess of what sort it was) scratching and scrambling 
about in the chimney close above her: then, saying to 
herself "This is Bill,” she gave one sharp kick, and waited 
to see what would happen next. 

The first thing she heard was a general chorus of 
"There goes Bill!” then the Rabbit’s voice alone—“Catch 
him, you by the hedge!” then silence, and then another 
confusion of voices—“Hold up his head—Brandy now— 



44 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

Don’t choke him—How was it, old fellow? What hap¬ 
pened to you? Tell us all about it!” 

Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice. (“That’s 
Bill,” thought Alice.) “Well, I hardly know—No more, 
thank ye; I’m better now—but I’m a deal too flustered to 
tell you—all I know is, something comes at me like a 
Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket!” 

“Sc you did, old fellow!” said the others. 

“We must burn the house down!” said the Rabbit’s 
voice. And Alice called out, as loud as she could, “If you 
do, I’ll set Dinah at you!” 

There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought 
to herself “I wonder what they will do next! If they had 
any sense, they’d take the roof off.” After a minute or 
two they began moving about again, and Alice heard the 
Rabbit say “A barrowful will do, to begin with.” 

“A barrowful of what ?” thought Alice. But she had not 
long to doubt, for the next moment a shower of little 
pebbles came rattling in at the window, and some of them 
hit her in the face. “I’ll put a stop to this,” she said to 
herself, apd shouted out "You’d better not do that 
again!” which produced another dead silence. 

Alice noticed, with some surprise, that the pebbles 
were all turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, 
and a bright idea came into her head. "If I eat one of 
these cakes”, she thought, “it’s sure to make some change 
in my size; and, as it ca'n’t possibly make me larger, it 
must make me smaller, I suppose.” 

So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to 
find that she began shrinking directly. As soon as she was 
small enough to get through the door, she ran out of the 
house, and found quite a crowd of little animals and birds 
waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in the 
middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giv¬ 
ing it something out of a bottle. They all made a rush at 
Alice the moment she appeared; but she ran off as hard as 
she could, and soon found herself safe in a thick wood. 

“The first thing I’ve got to do”, said Alice to herself, as 



THE RABBIT SENDS IN A LITTLE BILL 45 

she wandered about in the wood, “is to grow to my right 
size again; and the second thing is to find my way into 
that lovely garden. I think that will be the best plan.” 



It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly 
and simply arranged: the only difficulty was, that she had 
not the smallest idea how to set about it; and, while she 
was peering about anxiously among the trees, a little 
sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a great 
hurry. 





46 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

An enormous puppy was looking down at her with 
large round eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, try¬ 
ing to touch her. “Poor little thing!” said Alice, in a coax¬ 
ing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but she was 
terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it 
might be hungry, in which case it would be very likely to 
eat her up in spite of all her coaxing. 

Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit 
of stick, and held it out to the puppy: whereupon the 
puppy jumped into the air off all its feet at once, with a 
yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick, and made believe 
to worry it: then Alice dodged behind a great thistle, to 
keep herself from being run over; and, the moment she 
appeared on the other side, the puppy made another rush 
at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in its hurry to 
get hold of it: then Alice, thinking it was very like having 
a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every 
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the 
thistle again: then the puppy began a series of short 
charges at the stick, running a very little way forwards 
each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely all 
the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, 
with its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great 
eyes half shut. 

This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making 
her escape: so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite 
tired and out of breath, and till the puppy’s bark sounded 
quite faint in the distance. 

“And yet what a dear little puppy it was!” said Alice, 
as she leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned 
herself with one of the leaves. “I should have liked teach¬ 
ing it tricks very much, if—if I’d only been the right size 
to do it! Oh dear! I’d nearly forgotten that I’ve got to 
grow up again! Let me see—how is it to be managed? I 
suppose I ought to eat or drink something or other; but 
the great question is ‘What?’ ” 

The great question certainly was “What?” Alice looked 
all round her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but 



THE RABBIT SENDS IN A LITTLE BILL 47 

she could not see anything that looked like the right thing 
to eat or drink under the circumstances. There was a 
large mushroom growing near her, about the same height 
as herself; and, when she had looked under it, and on both 
sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her that she might 
as well look and see what was on top of it. 

She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the 
edge of the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met 
those of a large blue caterpillar, that was sitting on the 
top, with its arms folded, quietly smoking a long hookah, 
and taking not the smallest notice of her or of anything 
else. 




Chapter V 

Advice from a Caterpillar 

The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some 
time in silence: at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out 
of its mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice. 

“Who ar eyoul” said the Caterpillar. 

This was not an encouraging opening for a conversa¬ 
tion. Alice replied, rather shyly, “I—I hardly know. Sir, 
just at present—at least I know who I was when I got up 
this morning, but I think I must have been changed sev¬ 
eral times since then.” 

“What do you mean by that?” said the Caterpillar, 
sternly. “Explain yourself!” 

48 





ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR 49 

“I ca’n't explain myself, I’m afraid. Sir,” said Alice, 
“because I’m not myself, you see.” 

“I don’t see,” said the Caterpillar. 

“I’m afraid I ca’n’t put it more clearly,” Alice replied, 
very politely, “for I ca’n’t understand it myself, to begin 
with; and being so many different sizes in a day is very 
confusing.” 

“It isn’t,” said the Caterpillar. 

“Well, perhaps you haven’t found it so yet,” said Alice; 
“but when you have to turn into a chrysalis—you will 
some day, you know—and then after that into a butter¬ 
fly, I should think you’ll feel it a little queer, wo’n’t 
you?” 

“Not a bit,” said the Caterpillar. 

“Well, perhaps your feelings may be different,” said 
Alice: “all I know is, it would feel very queer to me” 

“You!” said the Caterpillar contemptuously. “Who are 
you?” 

Which brought them back again to the beginning of 
the conversation. Alice felt a little irritated at the Cater¬ 
pillar’s making such very short remarks, and she drew 
herself up and said, very gravely, “I think you ought to 
tell me who you are, first.” 

“Why?” said the Caterpillar. 

Here was another puzzling question; and, as Alice 
could not think of any good reason, and the Caterpillar 
seemed to be in a very unpleasant state of mind, she 
turned away. 

“Come back!” the Caterpillar called after her. “I’ve 
something important to say!” 

This sounded promising,, certainly. Alice turned and 
came back again. 

“Keep your temper,” said the Caterpillar. 

“Is that all?” said Alice, swallowing down her anger as 
well as she could. 

“No,” said the Caterpillar. 

Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had noth¬ 
ing else to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her some- 



50 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

thing worth hearing. For some minutes it puffed away 
without speaking; but at last it unfolded its arms, took 
the hookah out of its mouth again, and said “So you think 
you’re changed, do you?” 

“I’m afraid I am, Sir,” said Alice. “I ca’n’t remember 
things as I used—and I don’t keep the same size for ten 
minutes together!” 

“Ca’n’t remember what things?” said the Caterpillar. 

“Well, I’ve tried to say ‘How doth the little busy bee’, 
but it all came different!” Alice replied in a very melan¬ 
choly voice. 

“Repeat ‘ You are old, Father William’,” said the Cater¬ 
pillar. 

Alice folded her hands, and began: 



“You are old, Father William” the young man said 
‘‘Andyour hair has become very white; 

And yet you incessantly stand on your head — 

Do you think, at your age, it is right?" 





ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR 51 

“In my youth”, Father William replied to his son, 

“I feared it might injure the brain; 

But, now that I’m perfectly sure I have none, 

Why, 1 do it again and again.” 

“You are old,” said the youth, “as I mentioned before. 

A nd have grown most uncommonly fat; 

Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door — 

Pray, what is the reason of that?” 



“In my youth”, said the sage, as he shook his grey locks, 

“I kept all my limbs very supple 
By the use of this ointment—one shilling the box — 

Allow me to sell you a couple?” 

“You are old”, said the youth, “and your jaws are too weak 
For anything tougher than suet; 

Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak — 
Pray, how did you manage to do it?” 

“In my youth”, said his father, “I took to the law. 

And argued each case with my wife; 

And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw 
Has lasted the rest of my life.” 































52 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

“You are old,” said the youth, “one would hardly suppose 
That your eye was as steady as ever; 

Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose — 

What made you so awfully clever?” 

“I have answered three questions, and that is enough,” 
Said his father, “Don’t give yourself airs! 

Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff? 

Be off, or I’ll kick you down-stairs!” 



“That is not said right,” said the Caterpillar. 

“Not quite right, I’m afraid,” said Alice, timidly: “some 
of the words have got altered.” 

“It is wrong from beginning to end,” said the Cater¬ 
pillar, decidedly; and there was silence for some minutes. 

The Caterpillar was the first to speak. 

“What size do you want to be?” it asked. 

“Oh, I’m not particular as to size,” Alice hastily re¬ 
plied; “only one doesn’t like changing so often, you 
know.” 

“I don’t know,” said the Caterpillar. 

Alice said nothing: she had never been so much contra- 











































ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR 


53 



dieted in all her life before, and she felt that she was losing 
her temper. 

“Are you content now!” said the Caterpillar. 

"Well, I should like to be a little larger, Sir, if you 
wouldn't mind,” said Alice: “three inches is such a 
wretched height to be.” 

"It is a very good height indeed!” said the Caterpillar 
angrily, rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly 
three inches high). 

“But I’m not used to it!” pleaded poor Alice in a piteous 
tone. And she thought to herself “I wish the creatures 
wouldn't be so easily offended!” 

“You’ll get used to it in time,” said the Caterpillar; and 
it put the hookah into its mouth, and began smoking 
again. 

This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak 
again. In a minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah 
out of its mouth, and yawned once or twice, and shook it¬ 
self. Then it got down off the mushroom, and crawled 
away into the grass, merely remarking, as it went, "One 









54 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

side will make you grow taller, and the other side will 
make you grow shorter.” 

“One side of what ? The other side of whatV ' thought 
Alice to herself. 

“Of the mushroom,” said the Caterpillar, just as if she 
had asked it aloud; and in another moment it was out of 
sight. 

Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom 
for a minute, trying to make out which were the two sides 
of it; and, as it was perfectly round, she found this a very 
difficult question. However, at last she stretched her arms 
round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit of the 
edge with each hand. 

“And now which is which?” she said to herself, and 
nibbled a little of the right-hand bit to try the effect. The 
next moment she felt a violent blow underneath her chin: 
it had struck her foot! 

She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden 
change, but she felt that there was no time to be lost, as 
she was shrinking rapidly: so she set to work at once to 
eat some of the other bit. Her chin was pressed so closely 
against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her 
mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a 
morsel of the left-hand bit. 

* * * * * 


* 


* * * 


***** 

“Come, my head’s free at last!” said Alice in a tone of 
delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, 
when she found that her shoulders were nowhere to be 
found: all she could see, when she looked down, was an 
immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk 
out of a sea of green leaves that lay far below her. 

“What can all that green stuff be?” said Alice. “And 
where have my shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, 
how is it I ca'n’t see you?” She was moving them about, 



ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR 55 

as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow, except a little 
shaking among the distant green leaves. 

As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands 
up to her head, she tried to get her head down to them, 
and was delighted to find that her neck would bend about 
easily in any direction, like a serpent. She had just suc¬ 
ceeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was 
going to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be 
nothing but the tops of the trees under which she had 
been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in 
a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was 
beating her violently with its wings. 

"Serpent!” screamed the Pigeon. 

"I’m not a serpent!” said Alice indignantly. "Let me 
alone!” 

“Serpent, I say again!” repeated the Pigeon, but in a 
more subdued tone, and added, with a kind of sob, “I’ve 
tried every way, but nothing seems to suit them!” 

"I haven’t the least idea what you’re talking about,” 
said Alice. 

“I’ve tried the roots of trees, and I’ve tried banks, and 
I’ve tried hedges,” the Pigeon went on, without attend¬ 
ing to her; “but those serpents! There’s no pleasing 
them!” 

Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought 
there was no use in saying anything more till the Pigeon 
had finished. 

“As if it wasn’t trouble enough hatching the eggs,” 
said the Pigeon; “but I must be on the look-out for ser¬ 
pents, night and day! Why, I haven’t had a wink of sleep 
these three weeks!” 

“I’m very sorry you’ve been annoyed,” said Alice, who 
was beginning to see its meaning. 

“And just as I’d taken the highest tree in the wood,” 
continued the Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, “and 
just as I was thinking I should be free of them at last, they 
must needs come wriggling down from the sky! Ugh, 
Serpent!” 



56 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

“But I’m not a serpent, I tell you!’’ said Alice. “I'm a—* 
_ >> 

m a- 

“Well! What are you?” -said the Pigeon. “I can see 
you’re trying to invent something!” 

“I—I’m a little girl,” said Alice, rather doubtfully, as 
she remembered the number of changes she had gone 
through, that day. 

“A likely story indeed!” said the Pigeon, in a tone of the 
deepest contempt. "I’ve seen a good many little girls in 
my time, but never one with such a neck as that! No, no! 
You’re a serpent; and there’s no use denying it. I suppose 
you’ll be telling me next that you never tasted an egg!” 

“I have tasted eggs, certainly,” said Alice, who was a 
very truthful child; “but little girls eat eggs quite as much 
as serpents do, you know.” 

“I don’t believe it,” said the Pigeon; “but if they do, 
then they’re a kind of serpent: that’s all I can say.” 

This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite 
silent for a minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the -op¬ 
portunity of adding “You’re looking for eggs, I know that 
well enough; and what does it matter to me whether 
you’re a little girl or a serpent?” 

“It matters a good deal to me,” said Alice hastily; “but 
I’m not looking for eggs, as it happens; and, if I was, I 
shouldn’t want yours: I don’t like them raw.” 

"Well, be off, then!” said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as 
it settled down again into its nest. Alice crouched down 
among the trees as well as she could, for her neck kept 
getting entangled among the branches, and every now and 
then she had to stop and untwist it. After a while she re¬ 
membered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in 
her hands, and she set to work very carefully, nibbling 
first at one and then at the other, and growing sometimes 
taller, and sometimes shorter, until she had succeeded in 
bringing herself down to her usual height. 

It was so long since she had been anything near the 
right size, that it felt quite strange at first; but she got 
used to it in a few minutes, and began talking to herself, 



PIG AND PEPPER 


57 

as usual, “Come, there’s half my plan done now! How 
puzzling all these changes are! I’m never sure what I’m 
going to be, from one minute to another! However, I’ve 
got back to my right size: the next thing is, to get into 
that beautiful garden—how is that to be done, I wonder? ” 
As she said this, she came suddenly upon an open place, 
with a little house in it about four feet high. “Whoever 
lives there,’’ thought Alice, “it’ll never do to come upon 
them this size: why, I should frighten them out of their 
wits!’’ So she began nibbling at the right-hand bit again, 
and did not venture to go near the house till she had 
brought herself down to nine inches high. 


Chapter VI 
Pig and Pepper 

For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and 
wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in 
livery came running out of the wood—(she considered 
him to be a footman because he was in livery: otherwise, 
judging by his face only, she would have called him a 
fish)—and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. It 
was opened by another footman in livery, with a round 
face, and large eyes like a frog; and both footmen, Alice 
noticed, had powdered hair that curled all over their 
heads. She felt very curious to know what it was all about, 
and crept a little way out of the wood to listen. 

The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his 
arm a great letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he 
handed over to the other, saying, in a solemn tone, “For 
the Duchess. An invitation from the Queen to play cro¬ 
quet.’’ The Frog-Footman repeated, in the same solemn 
tone, only changing the order of the words a little, “From 
the Queen. An invitation for the Duchess to play croquet.” 



58 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 



Then they both bowed, and their curls got entangled 
together. 

Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back 
into the wood for fear of their hearing her; and, when 
she next peeped out, the Fish-Footman was gone, and the 
other was sitting on the ground near the door, staring 
stupidly up into the sky. 

Alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked. 

“There’s no sort of use in knocking,” said the Footman, 
“and that for two reasons. First, because I’m on the same 
side of the door as you are: secondly, because they’re mak¬ 
ing such a noise inside, no one could possibly hear you.” 
And certainly there was a most extraordinary noise going 
on within—a constant howling and sneezing, and every 












PIG AND PEPPER 59 

now and then a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been 
broken to pieces. 

“Please, then,” said Alice, “how am I to get in?” 

“There might be some sense in your knocking”, the 
Footman went on, without attending to her, “if we had 
the door between us. For instance, if you were inside, you 
might knock, and I could let you out, you know.” He 
was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, 
and this Alice thought decidedly uncivil. “But perhaps he 
ca’n’t help it,” she said to herself; “his eyes are so very 
nearly at the top of his head. But at any rate he might 
answer questions.—How am I to get in?” she repeated, 
aloud. 

“I shall sit here”, the Footman remarked, “till to-mor¬ 
row-” 

At this moment the door of the house opened, and a 
large plate came skimming out, straight at the Footman’s 
head: it just grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against 
one of the trees behind him. 

“-or next day, maybe,” the Footman continued in 

the same tone, exactly as if nothing had happened. 

“How am I to get in?” asked Alice again, in a louder 
tone. 

"Are you to get in at all?” said the Footman. “That’s 
the first question, you know.” 

It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. 
“It’s really dreadful”, she muttered to herself, “the way 
all the creatures argue. It’s enough to drive one crazy!” 

The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity 
for repeating his remark, with variations. “I shall sit 
here,” he said, “on and off, for days and days.” 

“But what am I to do?” said Alice. 

“Anything you like,” said the Footman, and began 
whistling. 

“Oh, there’s no use in talking to him,” said Alice des¬ 
perately: “he’s perfectly idiotic!” And she opened the 
door and went in. 

The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full 



60 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

of smoke from one end to the other: the Duchess was sit¬ 
ting on a three-legged stool in the middle, nursing a baby: 
the cook was leaning over the fire, stirring a large caul¬ 
dron which seemed to be full of soup. 

“There’s certainly too much pepper in that soup!’’ Alice 
said to herself, as well as she could for sneezing. 

There was certainly too much of it in the air. Even the 
Duchess sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was 
sneezing and howling alternately without a moment’s 
pause. The only two creatures in the kitchen, that did not 
sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat, which was lying on 
the hearth and grinning from ear to ear. 

“Please would you tell me”, said Alice, a little timidly, 
for she was not quite sure whether it was good manners 
for her to.speak first, “why your cat grins like that?” 

“It’s a Cheshire-Cat”, said the Duchess, “and that’s 
why. Pig!” 

She said the last word with such sudden violence that 
Alice quite jumped; but she saw in another moment that 
it was addressed to the baby, and not to her, so she took 
courage, and went on again: 

"I didn’t know that Cheshire-Cats always grinned; in 
fact, I didn’t know that cats could grin.” 

“They all can,” said the Duchess; “and most of ’em do.” 

“I don’t know of any that do,” Alice said very politely, 
feeling quite pleased to have got into a conversation. 

“You don’t know much,” said the Duchess; “and that's 
a fact.” 

Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and 
thought it would be as well to introduce some other sub¬ 
ject of conversation. While she was trying to fix on one, 
the cook took the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once 
set to work throwing everything within her reach at the 
Duchess and the baby—the fire-irons came first; then fol¬ 
lowed a shower of sauce-pans, plates, and dishes. The 
Duchess took no notice of them even when they hit her; 
and the baby was howling so much already, that it was 
quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not. 



PIG AND PEPPER 


6l 



“Oh, please mind what you’re doing!” cried Alice, 
jumping up and down in an agony of terror. “Oh, there 
goes his precious nose!” as an unusually large saucepan 
flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off. 

“If everybody minded their own business”, the Duchess 
said, in a hoarse growl, “the world would go round a deal 
faster than it does.” 

“Which would not be an advantage,” said Alice, who 
felt very glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little 
of her knowledge. “Just think what work it would make 
with the day and night! You see the earth takes twenty- 
four hours to turn round on its axis-” 

“Talking of axes,” said the Duchess, “chop off her 
head!” 

Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she 
meant to take the hint; but the cook was busily stirring 
the soup, and seemed not to be listening, so she went on 
again: “Twenty-four hours, I think ; or is it twelve? I-” 











62 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

“Oh, don’t bother we!” said the Duchess. “I never could 
abide figures!” And with that she began nursing her child 
again, singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giv¬ 
ing it a violent shake at the end of every line: 

“Speak roughly to your little hoy, 

And heat him when he sneezes: 

He only does it to annoy, 

Because he knows it teases 

Chorus 

(in which the cook and the baby joined): 

“Wow! wow! wow!” 

While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, 
she kept tossing the baby violently up and down, and the 
poor little thing howled so, that Alice could hardly hear 
the words: 

“I speak severely to my hoy, 

I heat him when he sneezes; 

For he can thoroughly enjoy 
The pepper when he pleases!” 

Chorus 

“Wow! wow! wow!” 

“Here! You may nurse it a bit, if you like!” the Duchess 
said to Alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke. “I 
must go and get ready to play croquet with the Queen,” 
and she hurried out of the room. The cook threw a frying- 
pan after her as she went, but it just missed her. 

Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a 
queer-shaped little creature, and held out its arms and 
legs in all directions, “just like a star-fish”, thought Alice. 
The poor little thing was snorting like a steam-engine 
when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and 
straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the 
first minute or two, it was as much as she could do to hold 
it. 



PIG AND PEPPER 


63 

As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing 
it (which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then 
keep tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to pre¬ 
vent its undoing itself), she carried it out into the open 
air. “If I don’t take this child away with me,” thought 
Alice, “they’re sure to kill it in a day or two. Wouldn’t 



it be murder to leave it behind?” She said the last words 
out loud, and the little thing grunted in reply (it had left 
off sneezing by this time). “Don’t grunt,” said Alice; 
“that’s not at all a proper way of expressing yourself.” 

The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anx¬ 
iously into its face to see what was the matter with it. 
There could be no doubt that it had a very turn-up nose, 
much more like a snout than a real nose: also its eyes were 
getting extremely small for a baby: altogether Alice did 
not like the look of the thing at all. "But perhaps it was 



64 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

only sobbing,” she thought, and looked into its eyes again, 
to see if there were any tears. 

No, there were no tears. “If you’re going to turn into, a 
pig, my dear,” said Alice, seriously, “I’ll have nothing 
more to do with you. Mind now!” The poor little thing 
sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible to say which), 
and they went on for some while in silence. 

Alice was just beginning to think to herself, “Now, 
what am I to do with this creature, when I get it home?” 
when it grunted again, so violently, that she looked down 
into its face in some alarm. This time there could be no 
mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, 
and she felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry 
it any further. 

So she set the little creature down, and felt quite re¬ 
lieved to see it trot away quietly into the wood. “If it had 
grown up”, she said to herself, “it would have made a 
dreadfully ugly child: but it makes rather a handsome 
pig, I think.” And she began thinking over other children 
she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just 
saying to herself “if one only knew the right way to 

change them-” when she was a little startled by seeing 

the Cheshire-Cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards 
off. 

The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked 
good-natured, she thought: still it had very long claws and 
a great many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated 
with respect. 

“Cheshire-Puss,” she began, rather timidly, as she did 
not at all know whether it would like the name: however, 
it only grinned a little wider. “Come, it’s pleased so far,” 
thought Alice, and she went on. “Would you tell me, 
please, which way I ought to go from here?” 

“That depends a good deal on where you want to get 
to,” said the Cat. 

“I don’t much care where-” said Alice. 

“Then it doesn’t matter which way you go,” said the 
Cat. 



“-so long as I get 

somewhere,” Alice added as 
an explanation. 

“Oh, you’re sure to do 
that”, said the Cat, “if you 
only walk long enough.” 

Alice felt that this could 
not be denied, so she tried an¬ 
other question. “What sort 
of people live about here?” 

“In that direction”, the 
Cat said, waving its right 
paw round, “lives a Hatter: 
and in that direction”, wav¬ 
ing the other paw, “lives a 
March Hare. Visit either you 
like: they’re both mad.” 
“But I don’t want to go among mad people,” Alice re¬ 
marked. 

“Oh, you ca’n’t help that,” said the Cat: “we’re all mad 
here. I’m mad. You’re mad.” 



“How do you know I’m mad?” said Alice. 

“You must be”, said the Cat, “or you wouldn’t have 
come here.” 



66 Alice's adventures in wonderland 

Alice didn’t think that proved it at all: however, she 
went on: “And how do you know that you’re mad?” 

“To begin with,” said the Cat, “a dog’s not mad. You 
grant that?” 

“I suppose so,” said Alice. 

“Well, then,” the Cat went on, “you see a dog growls 
when it’s angry, and wags its tail when it’s pleased. Now 
I growl when I'm pleased, and wag my tail when I’m 
angry. Therefore I’m mad.” 

“/ call it purring, not growling,” said Alice. 

“Call it what you like,” said the Cat. “Do you play 
croquet with the Queen to-day?” 

“I should like it very much,” said Alice, “but I haven’t 
been invited yet.” 

“You'll see me there,” said the Cat, and vanished. 

Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so 
well used to queer things happening. While she was still 
looking at the place where it had been, it suddenly ap¬ 
peared again. 

“By-the-bye, what became of the baby?” said the Cat. 
“I’d nearly forgotten to ask.” 

“It turned into a pig,” Alice answered very quietly, just 
as if the Cat had come back in a natural way. 

“I thought it would,” said the Cat, and vanished again. 

Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but 
it did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on 
in the direction in which the March Hare was said to live. 
“I’ve seen hatters before,” she said to herself: “the March 
Hare will be much the most interesting, and perhaps, as 
this is May, it wo’n’t be raving mad—at least not so mad 
as it was in March.” As she said this, she looked up, and 
there was the Cat again, sitting on a branch of a tree. 

“Did you say ‘pig’, or ‘fig’?” said the Cat. 

“I said ‘pig’,” replied Alice; “and I wish you wouldn’t 
keep appearing and vanishing so suddenly: you make one 
quite giddy!” 

“All right,” said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite 
slowly, beginning with the end of the tail, and ending 



PIG AND PEPPER 67 

with the grin, which remained some time after the rest of 
it had gone. 

“Well! I’ve often seen a cat without a grin,” thought 
Alice; “but a grin without a cat! It’s the most curious 
thing I ever saw in all my life!” 



She had not gone much farther before she came in sight 
of the house of the March Hare: she thought it must be 
the right house, because the chimneys were shaped like 
ears and the roof was thatched with fur. It was so large a 
house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had nib¬ 
bled some more of the left-hand bit of mushroom, and 
raised herself to about two feet high: even then she 
walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself 
“Suppose it should be raving mad after all! I almost wish 
I’d gone to see the Hatter instead!” 




68 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 


Chapter VII 
A Mad Tea-Party 

There was a table set out under a tree in front of the 
house, and the March Hare and the Hatter were having 
tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting between them, fast 
asleep, and the other two were using it as a cushion, rest¬ 
ing their elbows on it, and talking over its head. "Very 
uncomfortable for the Dormouse,” thought Alice; "onfy 
as it’s asleep, I suppose it doesn’t mind.” 

The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded 
together at one corner of it. "No room! No room!” they 
cried out when they saw Alice coming. "There’s plenty 
of room!” said Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a 
large arm-chair at one end of the table. 

"Have some wine,” the March Hare said in an encour¬ 
aging tone. 

Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing 
on it but tea. "I don’t see any wine,” she remarked. 

"There isn’t any,” said the March Hare. 

"Then it wasn’t very civil of you to offer it,” said Alice 
angrily. 

"It wasn’t very civil of you to sit down without being 
invited,” said the March Hare. 

"I didn’t know it was your table,” said Alice: "it’s laid 
for a great many more than three.” 

"Your hair wants cutting,” said the Hatter. He had 
been looking at Alice for some time with great curiosity, 
and this was his first speech. 

"You should learn not to make personal remarks,” 
Alice said with some severity: “It’s very rude.” 

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; 
but all he said was "Why is a raven like a writing- 
desk?” 

"Come, we shall have some fun now!” thought Alice. 



“Do you mean that you think you can find out the 
answer to it ? ” said the March Hare. 

“Exactly so,” said Alice. 

“Then you should say what you mean,” the March Hare 
went on. 

“I do,” Alice hastily replied; “at least—at least I mean 
what I say—that’s the same thing, you know.” 

“Not the same thing a bit!” said the Hatter. “Why, you 
might just as well say that ‘I see what I eat’ is the same 
thing as ‘I eat what I see’!” 

“You might just as well say”, added the March Hare, 
"that T like what I get’ is the same thing as 'I get what I 
like’!” 

“You might just as well say”, added the Dormouse, 
which seemed to be talking in its sleep, “that ‘I breathe 
when I sleep’ is the same thing as ‘I sleep when I 
breathe’!” 

“It is the same thing with you,” said the Hatter, and 









70 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

here the conversation dropped, and the party sat silent 
for a minute, while Alice thought over all she could re¬ 
member about ravens and writing-desks, which wasn’t 
much. 

The Hatter was the first to break the silence. "What 
day of the month is it?” he said, turning to Alice: he had 
taken his watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it 
uneasily, shaking it every now and then, and holding it 
to his ear. 

Alice considered a little, and then said “The fourth”. 

“Two days wrong!” sighed the Hatter. “I told you but¬ 
ter wouldn’t suit the works!” he added, looking angrily 
at the March Hare. 

“It was the best butter,” the March Hare meekly re¬ 
plied. 

“Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,” the 
Hatter grumbled: "you shouldn’t have put it in with the 
bread-knife.” 

The March Hare took the watch and looked at it 
gloomily: then he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked 
at it again: but he could think of nothing better to say 
than his first remark, “It was the best butter, you know.” 

Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some 
curiosity. “What a funny watch!” she remarked. “It tells 
the day of the month, and doesn’t tell what o’clock it is!” 

“Why should it?” muttered the Hatter. “Does your 
watch tell you what year it is?” 

“Of course not,” Alice replied very readily: “but that's 
because it stays the same year for such a long time to¬ 
gether.” 

“Which is just the case with mine,” said the Hatter. 

Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter’s remark 
seemed to her to have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it 
was certainly English. "I don’t quite understand you,” 
she said, as politely as she could. 

“The Dormouse is asleep again,” said the Hatter, and 
he poured a little hot tea upon its nose. 

The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, 



A MAD TEA-PARTY 71 

without opening its eyes. “Of course, of course: just what 
I was going to remark myself.” 

“Have you guessed the riddle yet?” the Hatter said, 
turning to Alice again. 

“No, I give it up,” Alice replied. “What’s the answer?” 

"I haven’t the slightest idea,” said the Hatter. 

“Nor I,” said the March Hare. 

Alice sighed wearily. “I think you might do something 
better with the time”, she said, “than wasting it in asking 
riddles that have no answers.” 

“If you knew Time as well as I do,” said the Hatter, 
“you wouldn’t talk about wasting it. It’s him.” 

“I don’t know what you mean,” said Alice. 

"Of course you don’t!” the Hatter said, tossing his head 
contemptuously. “I dare say you never even spoke to 
Time!” 

“Perhaps not,” Alice cautiously replied; “but I know I 
have to beat time when I learn music.” 

“Ah! That accounts for it,” said the Hatter. “He wo’n't 
stand beating. Now, if you only kept on good terms with 
him, he’d do almost anything you liked with the clock. 
For instance, suppose it were nine o’clock in the morning, 
just time to begin lessons: you’d only have to whisper a 
hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! 
Half-past one, time for dinner!” 

(“I only wish it was,” the March Hare said to itself in a 
whisper.) 

"That would be grand, certainly,” said Alice thought¬ 
fully; “but then—I shouldn’t be hungry for it, you 
know.” 

“Not at first, perhaps,” said the Hatter: “but you could 
keep it to half-past one as long as you liked.” 

“Is that the way you manage?” Alice asked. 

The Hatter shook his head mournfully. “Not I!” he re¬ 
plied. “We quarreled last March-just before he went 

mad, you know-” (pointing with his teaspoon at the 

March Hare,) “-it was at the great concert given by 

the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing 



72 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 



‘Twinkle, twinkle, little bat! 

How I wonder what you’re at!’ 

You know the song, perhaps?” 

"I’ve heard something like it,” said Alice. 

"It goes on, you know,” the Hatter continued, "in this 
way: 

‘ Up above the world you fly, 

Like a tea-tray in the sky. 

Twinkle, twinkle —' ” 

Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in 

its sleep " Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle -” and 

went on so long that they had to pinch it to make it stop. 

"Well, I’d hardly finished the first verse”, said the Hat¬ 
ter, "when the Queen bawled out ‘He’s murdering the 
time! Off with his head!’ ” 

"How dreadfully savage!” exclaimed Alice. 

"And ever since that”, the Hatter went on in a mourn¬ 
ful tone, "he wo’n’t do a thing I ask! It’s always six 
o’clock now.” 

A bright idea came into Alice’s head. “Is that the 
reason so many tea-things are put out here?” she asked. 






A MAD TEA-PARTY 


73 

“Yes, that’s it,” said the Hatter with a sigh: “it’s al¬ 
ways tea-time, and we’ve no time to wash the things 
between whiles.” 

“Then you keep moving round, I suppose?” said Alice. 

“Exactly so,” said the Hatter: “as the things get used 
up.” 

“But what happens when you come to the beginning 
again?” Alice ventured to ask. 

“Suppose we change the subject,” the March Hare in¬ 
terrupted, yawning. “I'm getting tired of this. I vote the 
young lady tells us a story. ” 

“I’m afraid I don’t know one,” said Alice, rather 
alarmed at the proposal. 

"Then the Dormouse shall!” they both cried. “Wake 
up, Dormouse!” And they pinched it on both sides at 
once. 

The Dormouse slowly opened its eyes. “I wasn’t 
asleep,” it said in a hoarse, feeble voice, “I heard every 
word you fellows were saying.” 

“Tell us a story!” said the March Hare. 

“Yes, please do!” pleaded Alice. 

"And be quick about it”, added the Hatter, “or you’ll 
be asleep again before it’s done.’’ 

“Once upon a time there were three little sisters,” the 
Dormouse began in a great hurry; “and their names were 
Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and they lived at the bottom of a 
weh-” 

“What did they live on?” said Alice, who always took 
a great interest in questions of eating and drinking. 

“They lived on treacle,” said the Dormouse, after 
thinking a minute or two. 

“They couldn’t have done that, you know,” Alice 
gently remarked. “They’d have been ill." 

"So they were,” said the Dormouse; “very ill.” 

Alice tried a little to fancy to herself what such an ex¬ 
traordinary way of living would be like, but it puzzled 
her too much: so she went on: “But why did they live at 
the bottom of a well?” 



74 ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND 

"Take some more tea,” the March Hare said to Alice, 
very earnestly. 

“I’ve had nothing yet,” Alice replied in an offended 
tone: "so I ca’n't take more.” 

“You mean you ca'n’t take less,” said the Hatter: “it’s 
very easy to take more than nothing.” 

"Nobody asked your opinion,”*said Alice. 

"Who’s making personal remarks now?” the Hatter 
asked triumphantly. 

Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she 
helped herself to some tea and bread-and-butter, and 
then turned to the Dormouse, and repeated her question. 
“Why did they live at the bottom of a well?” 

The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think 
about it, and then said "It was a treacle-well.” 

"There’s no such thing!” Alice was beginning very 
angrily, but the Hatter and the March Hare went "Sh! 
Sh!” and the Dormouse sulkily remarked "If you ca’n’t be 
civil, you’d better finish the story for yourself.” 

"No, please go on!” Alice said very humbly. "I wo’n’t 
interrupt you again. I dare say there may be one” 

"One, indeed!” said the Dormouse indignantly. How¬ 
ever, he consented to go on. “And so these three little 
sisters—they were learning to draw, you know ” 

“What did they draw?” said Alice, quite forgetting her 
promise. 

"Treacle,” said the Dormouse, without considering at 
all, this time. 

"I want a clean cup,” interrupted the Hatter: "let’s all 
move one place on.” 

He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed 
him: the March Hare moved into the Dormouse’s place, 
and Alice rather unwillingly took the place of the March 
Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any advan¬ 
tage from the change; and Alice was a good deal worse off 
than before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk- 
jug into his plate. 

Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she 



A MAD TEA-PARTY 75 

began very cautiously: “But I don’t understand. Where 
did they draw the treacle from?” 

“You can draw water out of a water-well,” said the 
Hatter; “so I should think you could draw treacle out of 
a treacle-well—eh, stupid?” 

“But they were in the well,” Alice said to the Dor¬ 
mouse, not choosing to notice this last remark. 



“Of course they were,” said the Dormouse: “well in.” 

This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the 
Dormouse go on for some time without interrupting it. 

“They were learning to draw,” the Dormouse went on, 
yawning and rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very 
sleepy; “and they drew all manner of things—everything 
that begins with an M-” 

“Why with an M?” said Alice. 

“Why not?” said the March Hare. 

Alice was silent. 

The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was 
going off into a doze; but, on being pinched by the Hat¬ 
ter, it woke up again with a little shriek, and went on: 
“•-that begins with an M, such as mouse-traps, and the 



76 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

moon, and memory, and muchness—you know you say 
things are ‘much of a muchness’—did you ever see such a 
thing as a drawing of a muchness!” 

"Really, now you ask me,’’ said Alice, very much con¬ 
fused, "I don’t think-” 

"Then you shouldn’t talk,” said the Hatter. 

This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: 
she got up in great disgust, and walked off: the Dormouse 
fell asleep instantly, and neither of the others took the 
least notice of her going, though she looked back once or 
twice, h$lf hoping that they would call after her: the last 
time she-saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse 
into the teapot. 

"At any rate I’ll never go there again!” said Alice, as 
she picked her way through the wood. "It’s the stupidest 
tea-party I ever was at in all my life!” 

Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees 
had a door leading right into it. “That’s very curious!” 
she thought. “But everything’s curious to-day. I think I 
may as well go in at once.” And in she went. 

Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close 
to the little glass table. "Now, I’ll manage better this 
time,” she said to herself, and began by taking the little 
golden key, and unlocking the <^oor that led into the gar¬ 
den. Then she set to work nibbling at the mushroom (she 
had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a 
foot high: then she walked down the little passage; and 
then —she found herself at last in the beautiful garden, 
among the bright flower-beds and the cool fountains. 


Chapter VIII 

The Queen’s Croquet Ground 

A large rose-tree stood near the entrace of the garden: 
the roses growing on it were white, but there were three 



THE QUEEN’S CROQUET GROUND 


77 



gardeners at it, busily painting them red. Alice thought 
this a very curious thing, and she went nearer to watch 
them, and, just as she came up to them, she heard one of 
them say "Look out now, Five! Don’t go splashing paint 
over me like that!” 

“I couldn’t help it,” said Five, in a sulky tone. "Seven 
jogged my elbow.” 

On which Seven looked up and said "That’s right, 
Five! Always lay the blame on others!” 

" You’d better not talk!” said Five. "I heard the Queen 
say only yesterday you deserved to be beheaded.” 

"What for?” said the one who had spoken first. 

"That’s none of your business, Two!” said Seven. 

"Yes, it is his business!” said Five. "And I’ll tell him— 
it was for bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.” 

Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun "Well, 





78 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

of all the unjust things-” when his eye chanced to fall 

upon Alice, as she stood watching them, and he checked 
himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and all of 
them bowed low. 

“Would you tell me, please,” said Alice, a little timidly, 
“why you are painting those roses?” 

Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two 
began, in a low voice, “Why, the fact is, you see, Miss, 
this here ought to have been a red rose-tree, and we put a 
white one in by mistake; and, if the Queen was to find it 
out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know. So 

you see, Miss, we’re doing our best, afore she comes, to-” 

At this moment, Five, who had been anxiously looking 
across the garden, called out “The Queen! The Queen!” 
and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat 
upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps, 
and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen. 

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs: these were all 
shaped like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with 
their hands and feet at the comers: next the ten courtiers: 
these were ornamented all over with diamonds, and 
walked two apd two, as the soldiers did. After these came 
the royal children: there were ten of them, and the little 
dears came jumping merrily along, hand in hand, in 
couples: they were all ornamented with hearts. Next 
came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among 
them Alice recognized the White Rabbit: it was talking in 
a hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything that was 
said, and went by without noticing her. Then followed 
the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King’s crown on a 
crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand proces¬ 
sion, came THE KING AND THE QUEEN OF 
HEARTS. 

Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie 
down on her face like the three gardeners, but she could 
not remember ever having heard of such a rule at pro¬ 
cessions; “and besides, what would be the use of a pro¬ 
cession”, thought she, “if people had all to lie down on 



THE QUEEN’S CROQUET GROUND 


79 



their faces, so that they couldn’t see it?” So she stood 
where she was, and waited. 

When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all 
stopped and looked at her, and the Queen said, severely, 
"Who is this?” She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who 
only bowed and smiled in reply. 

“Idiot!” said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; 
and, turning to Alice, she went on: “What’s your name, 
child?” 

“My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,” said Alice 
very politely; but she added, to herself, “Why, they’re 
























80 ALICE’S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND 

only a pack of cards, after all. I needn’t be afraid of 
them!” 

"And who are these ?” said the Queen, pointing to the 
three gardeners who were lying round the rose-tree; for, 
you see, as they were lying on their faces, and the pattern 
on their backs was the same as the rest of the pack, she 
could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or 
courtiers, or three of her own children. 

"How should I know?” said Alice, suprised at her own 
courage. "It's no business of mine” 

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring 
at her for a moment like a wild beast, began screaming 
"Off with her head! Off with-” 

"Nonsense!” said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and 
the Queen was silent. 

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said 
"Consider, my dear: she is only a child!” 

The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to 
the Knave “Turn them over!” 

The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot. 

"Get up!” said the Queen in a shrill, loud voice, and the 
three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing 
to the King, the Queen, the royal children, and every¬ 
body else. 

"Leave off that!” screamed the Queen. “You make me 
giddy.” And then, turning to the rose-tree, she went on 
"What have you been doing here?” 

"May it please your Majesty,” said Two, in a very 
humble tone, going down on one knee as he spoke, “we 
were trying-” 

“7 see!” said the Queen, who had meanwhile been 
examining the roses. “Off with their heads!” and the pro¬ 
cession moved on, three of the soldiers remaining behind 
to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran to Alice 
for protection. 

"You sha'n’t be beheaded!” said Alice, and she put 
them into a large flower-pot that stood near. The three 
soldiers wandered about for a minute or two, looking for 



THE QUEEN’S CROQUET GROUND 8l 

them, and then quietly marched oh after the others. 

“Are their heads off ? ” shouted the Queen. 

“Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!” the 
soldiers shouted in reply. 

“That’s right!” shouted the Queen. “Can you play 
croquet?” 

The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the 
question was evidently meant for her. 

“Yes!” shouted Alice. 

“Come on, then!” roared the Queen, and Alice joined 
the procession, wondering very much what would hap¬ 
pen next. 

“It’s—it’s a very fine day!” said a timid voice at her 
side. She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was 
peeping anxiously into hdriace. 

“Very,” said Alice. “Where’s the Duchess?” 

“Hush! Hush!” said the Rabbit in a low hurried tone. 
He looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and 
then raised himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her 
ear, and whispered “She’s under sentence of execution.” 

“What for?” said Alice. 

“Did you say ‘What a pity!’ ?” the Rabbit asked. 

“No, I didn’t,” said Alice. “I don’t think it’s at all a 
pity. I said ‘What for?’ ” 

“She boxed the Queen’s ears-” the Rabbit began. 

Alice gave a little scream of laughter. “Oh, hush!” the 
Rabbit whispered in a frightened tone. “The Queen will 
hear you! You* see she came rather late, and the Queen 
said-” 

“Get to your places!” shouted the Queen in a voice of 
thunder, and people began running about in all direc¬ 
tions, tumbling up against each other: however, they got 
settled down in a minute or two, and the game began. 

Alice thought she had never seen such a curious cro¬ 
quet ground in her fife: it was all ridges and furrows: 
the croquet balls were live hedgehogs, and the mallets live 
flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up 
and stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches. 


D 


L.C. 



82 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 


The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing 
her flamingo: she succeeded in getting its body tucked 
away, comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs 
hanging down, but generally, just as she had got its neck 



nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedge¬ 
hog a blow with its head, it would twist itself round and 
look up in her face, with such a puzzled expression that 
she could not help bursting out laughing; and, when she 
had got its head down, and was going to begin again, it 
was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had un¬ 
rolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides 
all this, there was generally a ridge or ar furrow in the 
way wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, 
as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up and 
walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came 
to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed. 

The players all played at once, without waiting for 



THE QUEEN’S CROQUET GROUND 83 

turns, quarreling all the while, and fighting for the hedge¬ 
hogs; and in a very short time the Queen was in a furious 
passion, and went stamping about, and shouting “Off 
with his head!” or “Off with her head!” about once in a 
minute. 

Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not 
as yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that 
it might happen any minute, “and then”, thought she, 
“what would become of me? They’re dreadfully fond of 
beheading people here: the great wonder is, that there’s 
any one left alive!” 

She was looking about for some way of escape, and 
wondering whether she could get away without being 
seen, when she noticed a curious appearance in the air: it 
puzzled her very much at first, but after watching it a 
minute or two she made it out to be a grin, and she said 
to herself “It’s the Cheshire-Cat: now I shall have some¬ 
body to talk to.” 

“How are you getting on?” said the Cat, as soon as 
there was mouth enough for it to speak with. 

Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. 
“It’s no use speaking to it”, she thought, "till its ears have 
come, or at least one of them.” In another minute the 
whole head appeared, and then Alice put down her flam¬ 
ingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad 
she had some one to listen to her. The Cat seemed to 
think that there was enough of it now in sight, and no 
more of it appeared. 

“I don’t think they play at all fairly,” Alice began, in 
rather a complaining tone, “and they all quarrel so dread¬ 
fully one ca’n’t hear oneself speak—and they don’t seem 
to have any rules in particular: at least, if there are, no¬ 
body attends to them—and you’ve no idea how confusing 
it is all the things being alive: for instance, there’s the 
arch I’ve got to go through next walking about at the 
other end of the ground—and I should have croqueted 
the Queen’s hedgehog just now, only it ran away when 
it saw mine coming!” 



84 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

"How do you like the Queen?” said the Cat in a low 
voice. 

"Not at all,” said Alice: "she’s so extremely-” Just 

then she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, 

listening: so she went on "-likely to win, that it’s 

hardly worth while finishing the game.” 

The Queen smiled and passed on. 

"Who are you talking to?” said the King, coming up to 
Alice, and looking at the Cat’s head with great curiosity. 

"It’s a friend of mine—a Cheshire-Cat,” said Alice: 
"allow me to introduce it.” 

"I don’t like the look of it at all,” said the King: "how¬ 
ever, it may kiss my hand, if it likes.” 

“I’d rather not,” the Cat remarked. 

"Don’t be impertinent,” said the King, "and don’t look 
at me like that!” He got behind Alice as he spoke. 

"A cat may look at a king,” said Alice. “I’ve read that 
in some book, but I don’t remember where.” 

"Well, it must be removed,” said the King very de¬ 
cidedly: and he called to the Queen, who was passing at 
the moment, “My dear! I wish you would have this cat 
removed!” 

The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, 
great or small. “Off with his head!” she said without even 
looking around. 

"I’ll fetch the executioner myself,” said the King 
eagerly, and he hurried off. 

Alice thought she might as well go back and see how 
the game was going on, as she heard the Queen’s voice 
in the distance, screaming with passion. She had already 
heard her sentence three of the players to be executed for 
having missed their turns, and she did not like the look 
of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that 
she never knew whether it was her turn or not. So she 
went off in search of her hedgehog. 

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another 
hedgehog, which seemed to Alice an excellent oppor¬ 
tunity for croqueting one of them with the other: the only 




THE QUEEN’S CROQUET GROUND 85 



difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across the 
other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying 
in a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree. 

By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought 
it back, the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were 
out of sight: “but it doesn’t matter much”, thought 
Alice, “as all the arches are gone from this side of the 
ground’.” So she tucked it away under her arm, that it 
might not escape again, and went, back to have a little 
more conversation with her friend. 

When she got back to the Cheshire-Cat, she was sur¬ 
prised to find quite a large crowd collected round it: there 
was a dispute going on between the executioner, the 
























86 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once, while 
all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfort¬ 
able. 

The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all 
three to settle the question, and they repeated their argu¬ 
ments to her, though, as they all spoke at once, she found 
it very hard to make out exactly what they said. 

The executioner's argument was, that you couldn’t cut 
off a head unless there was a body to cut it off from: that 
he had never had to do such a thing before, and he wasn’t 
going to begin at his time of life. 

The King's argument was that anything that had a head 
could be beheaded, and that you weren’t to talk nonsense. 

The Queen’s argument was that, if something wasn’t 
done about it in less than no time, she’d have everybody 
executed, all round. (It was this last remark that had 
made the whole party look so grave and anxious.) 

Alice could think of nothing else to say but “It belongs 
to the Duchess: you’d better ask her about it.” 

“She’s in prison,” the Queen said to the executioner: 
“fetch her here.” And the executioner went off like an 
arrow. 

The Cat’s head began fading away the moment he was 
gone, and, by the time he had come back with the Duch¬ 
ess, it had entirely disappeared: so the King and the exe¬ 
cutioner ran wildly up and down, looking for it, while 
the rest of the party went back to the game. 


Chapter IX 
The Mock Turtle’s Story 

“You ca’n’t think how glad I am to see you again, you 
dear old thing!” said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm 
affectionately into Alice’s, and they walked off together. 



THE MOCK TURTLE'S STORY 87 

Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant tem¬ 
per, and thought to herself that perhaps it was only the 
pepper that had made her so savage when they met in the 
kitchen. 

“When I’m, a Duchess”, she said to herself (not in a 
very hopeful tone, though), “I won’t have any pepper in 



my kitchen at all. Soup does very well without—Maybe 
it’s always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,” she 
went on, very much pleased at having found out a new 
kind of rule, “and vinegar that makes them sour—and 
camomile that makes them bitter—and—and barley- 
sugar and such things that make children sweet-tempered. 
I only wish people knew that : then they wouldn’t be so 
stingy about it, you know-” 



88 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and 
was a little startled when she heard her voice close to her 
ear. "You’re thinking about something, my dear, and 
that makes you forget to talk. I ca’n’t tell you just now 
what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in a 
bit.” 

“Perhaps it hasn’t one,” Alice ventured to remark. 

"Tut, tut, child!” said the Duchess. "Everything’s got 
a moral, if only you can find it.” And she squeezed her¬ 
self up closer to Alice’s side as she spoke. 

Alice did not much like her keeping so close to her: 
first because the Duchess was very ugly; and secondly, 
because she was exactly the right height to rest her chin 
on Alice’s shoulder, and it was an uncomfortably sharp 
chin. However, she did not like to be rude: so she bore it 
as well as she could. 

"The game’s going on rather better now,” she said, by 
way of keeping up the conversation a little. 

" 'Tis so,” said the Duchess: "and the moral of that is 
—‘Oh, ’tis love, 'tis love, that makes the world go round!’ ” 

"Somebody said”, Alice whispered, "that it’s done by 
everybody minding their own business! ” 

“Ah well! It means much the same thing,” said the 
Duchess, digging her sharp little chin into Alice’s shoul¬ 
der as she added "and the moral of that is—‘Take care of 
the sense and the sounds will take care of themselves.' ” 

"How fond she is of finding morals in things!” Alice 
thought to herself. 

“I dare say you’re wondering why I don’t put my arm 
round your waist,” the Duchess said, after a pause: "the 
reason is, that I’m doubtful about the temper of your 
flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?” 

"He might bite,” Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at 
all anxious to have the experiment tried. 

“Very true,” said the Duchess: "flamingoes and mus¬ 
tard both bite. And the moral of that is—‘Birds of a 
feather flock together.’ ” 

"Only mustard isn’t a bird,” Alice remarked. 



THE MOCK TURTLE’S STORY 89 

“Right, as usual,” said the Duchess: "what a clear way 
you have of putting things!” 

“It’s a mineral, I think,” said Alice. 

“Of course it is,” said the Duchess, who seemed ready 
to agree to everything that Alice said: “there’s a large 
mustard-machine near here. And the moral of that is— 
The more there is of mine, the less there is of yours.’ ” 

“Oh, I know!” exclaimed Alice, who had not attended 
to this last remark. “It’s a vegetable. It doesn’t look like 
one, but it is.” 

“I quite agree with you,” said the Duchess; "and the 
moral of that is—‘Be what you would seem to be’—or, if 
you’d like it put more simply—‘Never imagine yourself 
not to be otherwise than what it might appear to others 
that what you were or might have been was not otherwise 
than what you had been would have appeared to them to 
be otherwise.’ ” 

“I think I should understand that better”, Alice said 
very politely, "if I had it written down: but I ca’n’t quite 
follow it as you say it.” 

“That’s nothing to what I could say if I chose,” the 
Duchess replied, in a pleased tone. 

“Pray don’t trouble yourself to say it any longer than 
that,” said Alice. 

"Oh, don’t talk about trouble!” said the Duchess. “I 
make you a present of everything I’ve said as yet.” 

“A cheap sort of present!” thought Alice. "I’m glad 
people don’t give birthday-presents like that!” But she 
did not venture to say it out loud. 

“Thinking again?” the Duchess asked, with another 
dig of her sharp little chin. 

“I’ve a right to think,” said Alice sharply, for she was 
beginning to feel a little worried. 

“Just about as much right”, said the Duchess, “as pigs 
have to fly; and the m-” 

But here, to Alice’s great surprise, the Duchess’s voice 
died away, even in the middle of her favourite word 
“moral”, and the arm that was linked into hers began to 



90 Alice's adventures in wonderland 

tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen in 
front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a 
thunder-storm. 

“A fine day, your Majesty!” the Duchess began in a 
low, weak voice. 

“Now, I give you fair warning,” shouted the Queen, 
stamping on the ground as she spoke; “either you or your 
head must be off, and that in about half no time! Take 
your choice!” 

The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a 
moment. 

“Let's go on with the game,” the Queen said to Alice; 
and Alice was too much frightened to say a word, but 
slowly followed her back to the croquet ground. 

The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen's 
absence, and were resting in the shade: however, the mo¬ 
ment they saw her, they hurried back to the game, the 
Queen merely remarking that a moment's delay would 
cost them their lives. 

All the time they were playing the Queen never left off 
quarreling with the other players and shouting “Off with 
his head!” or “Off with her head!” Those whom she sen¬ 
tenced were taken into custody by the soldiers, who of 
course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that, by 
the end of half an hour or so, there were no arches left, 
and all the players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, 
were in custody and under sentence of execution. 

Then the Queen left oh, quite out of breath, and said 
to Alice, “Have you seen the Mock Turtle yet?” 

“No,” said Alice. “I don’t even know what a Mock 
Turtle is.” 

“It’s the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,” said 
the Queen. 

“I never saw one, or heard of one,” said Alice. 

“Come on, then,” said the Queen, "and he shall tell 
you his history.” 

As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say 
in a low voice, to the company, generally, “You are all 



THE MOCK TURTLE'S STORY 91 

pardoned.” “Come, that's a good thing!” she said to her¬ 
self, for she had felt quite unhappy at the number of 
executions the Queen had ordered. 

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast 
asleep in the sun. (If you don’t know what a Gryphon is, 
look at the picture.) “Up, lazy thing!” said the Queen, 
“and take this young lady to see the Mock Turtle, and to 



hear his history. I must go back and see after some exe¬ 
cutions I have ordered”; and she walked off, leaving Alice 
alone with the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look 
of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would be 
quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage 
Queen: so she waited. 

The Gryphon sat u{i and rubbed its eyes: then it 
watched the Queen till she was out of sight then it 
chuckled. “What fun!” said the Gryphon, half to itself, 
half to Alice. 

“What is the fun?” said Alice. 

“Why, she,” said the Gryphon. “It’s all her fancy that: 
they never executes nobody, you know. Come on!” 



92 ALICE S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND 



“Everybody says ‘come on!’ here,” thought Alice, as 
she went slowly after it: “I never was so ordered about 
before, in all my life, never!” 

They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle 
in the distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of 
rock, and, as they came nearer, Alice could hear him 
sighing as if his heart would break. She pitied him deeply. 
“What is his sorrow?” she asked the Gryphon. And the 
Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as be¬ 
fore, “It’s all his fancy, that: he hasn’t got no sorrow, you 
know. Come on!” 



















THE MOCK TURTLE’S STORY 93 

So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at 
them with large eyes full of tears, but said nothing. 

"This here young lady,” said the Gryphon, "she wants 
for to know your history, she do.” 

"I’ll tell it her,” said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow 
tone. "Sit down, both of you, and don’t speak a word till 
I’ve finished.” 

So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. 
Alice thought to herself "I don’t see how he can ever 
finish, if he doesn’t begin. ’’ But she waited patiently. - 

“Once”, §aid the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, 
"I was a real Turtle.” 

These words were followed by a very long silence, 
broken only by an occasional exclamation of "Hjckrrh!” 
from the Gryphon, and the constant heavy sobbing of the 
Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and say¬ 
ing, "Thank you, Sir, for your interesting story,” but she 
could not help thinking there must be more to come, so 
she sat still and said nothing. 

"When we were little”, the Mock Turtle went on at 
last, more calmly, though still sobbing a little now and 
then, “we went to school in the sea. The master was an 
old Turtle—we used to call him Tortoise-” 

"Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn’t one?” 
Alice asked. 

"We called him Tortoise because he taught us,” said 
the Mock Turtle angrily. "Really you are very dull!” 

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a 
simple question,” added the Gryphon; and then they 
both sat silent and looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to 
sink into the earth. At last the Gryphon said to the Mock 
Turtle "Drive on, old fellow! Don’t be all day about it!” 
and he went on in these words: 

“Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn’t 
believe it-” 

“I never said I didn’t!” interrupted Alice. 

“You did,” said the Mock Turtle. 

"Hold your tongue!” added the Gryphon, before Alice 



94 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

could speak again. The Mock Turtle went on. 

“We had the best of educations—in fact, we went to 
school every day——” 

“ I've been to a day-school, too,” said Alice. “You 
needn’t be so proud as all that.” 

“With extras?” asked the Mock Turtle, a little anxious- 

ty* 

“Yes,” said Alice: “we learned French and music.” 

“And washing?” said the Mock Turtle. 

“Certainly not!” said Alice, indignantly. 

“Ah! Then yours wasn’t a really good school,” said the 
Mock Turtle in a tone of great relief. “Now, at ours, they 
had, at the end of the bill, ‘French, music and washing— 
extra’.” 

“You couldn’t have wanted it much,” said Alice; “liv¬ 
ing at the bottom of the sea.” 

“I couldn’t afford to learn it,” said the Mock Turtle 
with a sigh. “I only took the regular course.” 

“What was that?” inquired Alice. 

“Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,” the 
Mock Turtle replied; “and then the different branches of 
Arithmetic—Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and 
Derision.” 

“I never heard of ‘Uglification’,” Alice ventured to say. 
“What is it?” 

The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. “Never 
heard of uglifying!” it exclaimed. “You know what to 
beautify is, I suppose?” 

“Yes,” said Alice doubtfully: “it means—to—make— 
anything—prettier.” 

“Well, then,” the Gryphon went on, “if you don’t know 
what to uglify is, you are a simpleton.” 

Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more ques¬ 
tions about it: so she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said 
“What else had you to learn?” 

“Well, there was Mystery,” the Mock Turtle replied, 
counting off the subjects on his flappers—“Mystery, 
ancient and modern, with Seaography: then Drawling— 



THE LOBSTER-QUADRILLE 95 

the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel, that used to 
come once a week: he taught us Drawling, Stretching, and 
Fainting in Coils.” 

“What was that like ? ” said Alice. 

“Well, I ca’n’t show it you, myself,” the Mock Turtle 
said “I’m too stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it.” 

“Hadn’t time,” said the Gryphon: “I went to the 
Classical master, though. He was an old crab, he was.” 

“I never went to him,” the Mock Turtle said with a 
sigh. “He taught Laughing and Grief, they used to say.” 

“So he did, so he did,” said the Gryphon, sighing in his 
turn; and both creatures hid their faces in their paws. 

“And how many hours a day did you do lessons?” said 
Alice, in a hurry to change the subject. 

“Ten hours the first day,” said the Mock Turtle: “nine 
the next, and so on.” 

‘‘What a curious plan! ’’ exclaimed Alice. 

“That’s the reason they’re called lessons,” the Gryphon 
remarked: “because they lessen from day to day.” 

This was quite a newddea to Alice, and she thought it 
over a little before she made her next remark. “Then the 
eleventh day must have been a holiday?” 

“Of course it was,” said the Mock Turtle. 

“And how did you manage on the twelfth?” Alice went 
on eagerly. 

“That’s enough about lessons,” the Gryphon inter¬ 
rupted in a very decided tone. “Tell her something about 
the games now.” 


Chapter X 
The Lobster-Ouadrille 

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of 
one flapper across his eyes. He looked at Alice and tried to 
speak, but, for a minute or two, sobs choked his voice. 



g6 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

“Same as if he had a bone in his throat,” said the Gry¬ 
phon; and it set to work shaking him and punching him 
in the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, 
and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on 
again: 

“You may not have lived much under the sea—” (“I 
haven’t,” said Alice)—“and perhaps you were never even 
introduced to a lobster—” (Alice began to say “I once 

tasted-” but checked herself hastily and said “No 

never”) “—so you can have no idea what a delightful 
thing a Lobster-Quadrille is!” 

“No, indeed,” said Alice. “What sort of a dance is it?” 

“Why,” said the Gryphon, "you first form into a fine 
along the sea-shore-” 

“Two lines!” cried the Mock Turtle. “Seals, turtles, 
salmon, and so on: then, when you’ve cleared all the 
jelly-fish out of the way-” 

“ That generally takes some time,” interrupted the 
Gryphon. 

“—you advance twice-” 

“Each with a lobster as a partner!” cried the Gryphon. 

"Of course,” the Mock Turtle said: "advance twice, set 
to partners-” 

“—change lobsters, and retire in same order,” con¬ 
tinued the Gryphon. 

“Then, you know,” the Mock Turtle went on, “you 
throw the-” 

“The lobsters!” shouted the Gryphon with a bound 
into the air. 

“—as far out to sea as you can-” 

“Swim after them!” screamed the Gryphon. 

“Turn a somersault in the sea!” cried the Mock Turtle, 
capering wildly about. 

“Change lobsters again!” yelled the Gryphon at the 
top of its voice. 

“Back to land again, and—that’s all the first figure,” 
said the Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and 
the two creatures, who had been jumping about like mad 



THE LOBSTER-QUADRILLE 


97 



things all this time, sat down again very sadly and quietly 
and looked at Alice. 

“It must be a very pretty dance,” said Alice timidly. 

“Would you like to see a little of it?” said the Mock 
Turtle. 

“Very much indeed,” said Alice. 

"Come, let’s try the first figure!” said the Mock Turtle 
to the Gryphon. “We can do it without lobsters, you 
know. Which shall sing ? ” 

"Oh, you sing,” said the Gryphon. “I’ve forgotten the 
words.” 

So they began solemnly dancing round and round 
Alice, every now and then treading on her toes when they 
passed too close, and waving their fore-paws to mark the 




98 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

time, when the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly and 
sadly: 

"Will you walk a little faster?” said a whiting to a snail, 
"There’s a porpoise close behind us, and he’s treading on my 
tail. 

See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance! 

They are waiting on the shingle—will you come and join the 
dance? 

Will you, wo’n’t you, will you, wo’n’t you, will you join the 
dance? 

Will you, wo’n’t you, will you, wo'n’t you, wo’n’t you join 
the dance? 

"You can really have no notion how delightful it will be 
"When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to 
sea!” 

But the snail replied "Too far, too far!” and gave a look 
askance — 

Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the 
dance. 

Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join 
the dance. 

Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join 
the dance. 

"What matters it how far we go?” his scaly friend replied. 
"There is another shore, you know, upon the other side. 

The further off from England the nearer is to France — 

Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance. 

Will you, wo’n’t you, will you, wo'n’t you, will you join the 
dance? 

Will you, wo’n’t you, will you, wo’n’t you, wo’n’t you join 
the dance?” 

“Thank you, it’s a very interesting dance to watch,’’ 
said Alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last: “and 
I do so like that curious song about the whiting!” 

“Oh, as to the whiting,” said the Mock Turtle, “they— 
you’ve seen them, of course?” 

“Yes,” said Alice, “I’ve often seen them at dinn——” 
she checked herself hastily. 



THE LOBSTER-QUADRILLE 99 

“I don’t know where Dinn may be,” said the Mock 
Turtle; "but, if you’ve seen them so often, of course you 
know what they’re like ? ” 

“I believe so,” Alice replied thoughtfully. “They have 
their tails in their mouths—and they’re all over crumbs.” 

“You’re wrong about the crumbs,” said the Mock 
Turtle: “crumbs would all wash off in the sea. But they 

have their tails in their mouths; and the reason is-” 

here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes. “Tell her 
about the reason and all that,” he said to the Gryphon. 

"The reason is”, said the Gryphon, “that they would go 
with the lobsters to the dance. So they got thrown out to 
sea. So they had to fall a long way. So they got their tails 
fast in their mouths. So they couldn’t get them out again. 
That’s all.” 

“Thank you,” said Alice, “it’s very interesting. I never 
knew so much about a whiting before.” 

“I can tell you more than that, if you like,” said the 
Gryphon. “Do you know why it’s called a whiting?” 

“I never thought about it,” said Alice. “Why?” 

“It does the boots and shoes” the Gryphon replied very 
solemnly. 

Alice was thoroughly puzzled. “Does the boots and 
shoes!” she repeated in a wondering tone. 

“Why, what are your shoes done with?” said the 
Gryphon. "I mean, what makes them so shiny?” 

Alice looked down at them, and considered a little be¬ 
fore she gave her answer. "They’re done with blacking, I 
believe.” 

“Boots and shoes under the sea”, the Gryphon went on 
in a deep voice, “are done with whiting. Now you know.” 

“And what are they made of?” Alice asked in a tone 
of great curiosity. 

“Soles and eels, of course,” the Gryphon replied, rather 
impatiently: “any shrimp could have told you that.” 

“If I’d been the whiting”, said Alice, whose thoughts 
were still running on the song, “I’d have said to the por¬ 
poise ‘Keep back, please! We don’t wan tyou with us!’ ” 



100 ALICE’S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND 

"They were obliged to have him with them,” the Mock 
Turtle said. "No wise fish would go anywhere without a 
porpoise.” 

"Wouldn’t it, really?” said Alice, in a tone of great 
surprise. 

“Of course not,” said the Mock Turtle. "Why, if a fish 
came to me, and told me he was going a journey, I should 
say ‘With what porpoise?’ ” 

"Don’t you mean ‘purpose’?” said Alice. 

"I mean what I say,” the Mock Turtle replied, in an 
offended tone. And the Gryphon added “Come, let’s hear 
some of your adventures.” 

"I could tell you my adventures—beginning from this 
morning,” said Alice a little timidly; "but it’s no use 
going back to yesterday, because I was a different person 
then.” 

"Explain all that,” said the Mock Turtle. 

"No, no! The adventures first,” said the Gryphon in an 
impatient tone: "explanations take such a dreadful time.” 

So Alice began telling them her adventures from the 
time when she first saw the White Rabbit. She was a little 
nervous about it, just at first, the two creatures got so 
close to her, one on each side, and opened their eyes and 
mouths so very wide; but she gained courage as she went 
on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the 
part about her repeating “You are old, Father William,” 
to the Caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and 
then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath, and said 
"That’s very curious!” 

"It’s all about as curious as it can be,” said the Gry¬ 
phon. 

"It all came different!” the Mock Turtle repeated 
thoughtfully. "I should like to hear her try and repeat 
something now. Tell her to begin.” He looked at the 
Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of authority 
over Alice. 

"Stand up and repeat ‘ ’TVs the voice of the sluggard’,” 
said the Gryphon. 



THE LOBSTER-QUADRILLE 


IOI 



“How the creatures order one about, and make one re¬ 
peat lessons!” thought Alice. “I might just as well be at 
school at once.” However, she got up, and began to re¬ 
peat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster-Quadrille, 
that she hardly knew what she was saying; and the words 
came very queer indeed: 

“’Tis the voice of the Lobster: I heard him declare 
‘ You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.’ 

Asa duck with his eyelids, so he with his nose 
Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes. 

When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark, 

And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark: 

But, when the tide rises and sharks are around. 

His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.” 



102 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

“That’s different from what I used to say when I was 
a child,’’ said the Gryphon. 

"Well, I never heard it before,” said the Mock Turtle; 
“but it sounds uncommon nonsense.” 

Alice said nothing: she had sat down with her face in 
her hands, wondering if anything would ever happen in a 
natural way again. 

"I should like to have it explained,” said the Mock 
Turtle. 

“She ca’n’t explain it,” said the Gryphon hastily. “Go 
on with the next verse.” 

"But about his toes?” the Mock Turtle persisted. “How 
could he turn them out with his nose, you know?” 

“It’s the first position in dancing,” Alice said; but she 
was dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to 
change the subject. 

“Go on with the next verse,” the Gryphon repeated: “it 
begins ‘I passed by his garden ’.” 

Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it 
would all come wrong, and she went on in a trembling 
voice: 

“I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye. 

How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie: 

The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat, 

While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat. 

When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon, 

Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon: 

While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl, 
And concluded the banquet by -” 

“What is the use of repeating all that stuff?” the Mock 
Turtle interrupted, “if you don’t explain it as you go on? 
It’s by far the most confusing thing that I ever heard!”' 

“Yes, I think you’d better leave off,” said the Gryphon, 
and Alice was only too glad to do so. 

“Shall we try another figure of the Lobster-Quadrille?” 
the Gryphon went on. “Or would you like the Mock Tur¬ 
tle to sing you another song?” 



THE LOBSTER-QUADRILLE 103 

“Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so 
kind,” Alice replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in 
a rather offended tone, “Hm! No accounting for tastes! 
Sing her ' Turtle Soup’, will you, old fellow?” 

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began in a voice 
choked with sobs, to sing this: 

“Beautiful Soup, so rich and green, 

Waiting in a hot tureen! 

Who for such dainties would not stoop? 

Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup! 

Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup! 

Beau—ootiful Soo—oop! 

Beau—ootiful Soo — oop! 

Soo—oop of the e — e — evening, 

Beautiful, beautiful Soup! 

“Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish, 

Game, or any other dish? 

Who would not give all else for two p 
enny worth only of beautiful Soup? 

Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup? 

Beau—ootiful Soo — oop! 

Beau—ootiful Soo — oop! 

Soo—oop of the e — e — evening, 

Beautifulbeauti—FUL SOUP!” 

“Chorus again!” cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Tur¬ 
tle had just begun to repeat it, when a cry of “The trial’s 
beginning!” was heard in the distance. 

“Come on!” cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by 
the hand, it hurried off, without waiting for the end of 
the song. 

“What trial is it?” Alice panted as she ran: but the 
Gryphon only answered “Come on!” and ran the faster, 
while more and more faintly came, carried on the breeze 
that followed them, the melancholy words: 

“Soo—oop of the e — e — evening. 

Beautiful, beautiful Soup!” 



Chapter XI 


Who Stole the Tarts? 

The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their 
throne when they arrived, with a great crowd assembled 
about them—all sorts of little birds and beasts, as well as 
the whole pack of cards: the Knave was standing before 
them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard him; 
and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet 
in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the 
very middle of the court was a table, with a large dish of 
tarts upon it: they looked so good, that it made Alice quite 
hungry to look at them—"I wish they’d get the trial 
done,” she thought, “and hand round the refreshments!” 
But there seemed to be no chance of this; so she began 
looking at everything about her to pass away the time. 

Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but 
she had read about them in books, and she was quite 
pleased to find that she knew the name of nearly every¬ 
thing there. “That’s the judge,” she said to herself, “be¬ 
cause of his great wig.” 

The judge, by the way, was the King; and, as he wore 
his crown over the wig (look at the frontispiece if you 
want to see how he did it), he did not look at all comfort¬ 
able, and it was certainly not becoming. 

“And that’s the jury-box,” thought Alice; “and those 
twelve creatures,” (she was obliged to say “creatures,” 
you see, because some of them were animals, and some 
were birds,) “I suppose they are the jurors.” She said this 
last word two or three times over to herself, being rather 
proud of it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few 
little girls of her age knew the meaning of it at all. How¬ 
ever, “jurymen” would have done just as well. 

The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. 
“What are they doing?” Alice whispered to the Gryphon. 

104 



WHO STOLE THE TARTS? 105 


“They ca’n’t have anything to put down yet, before the 
trial’s begun.” 

“They’re putting down their names”, the Gryphon 
whispered in reply, “for fear they should forget them be¬ 
fore the end of the trial.” 

“Stupid things!” Alice began in a loud indignant voice; 
but she ^topped herself hastily, for the White Rabbit cried 



out “Silence in the court!” and the King put on his spec¬ 
tacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who was 
talking. 

Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their 
shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down “Stupid 
things!” on their slates, and she could even make out that 
one of them didn’t know how to spell “stupid”, and that 
he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. “A nice muddle 
their slates’ll be in, before the trial’s over!” thought Alice. 

One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This, of 



106 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

course, Alice could not stand, and she went round the 
court and got behind him, and very soon found an oppor¬ 
tunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly that the 
poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make 
out at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all 
about for it, he was obliged to write with one finger for the 
rest of the day; and this was of very little use, as it left no 
mark on the slate. 

“Herald, read the accusation!” said the King. 

On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trum¬ 
pet, and then unrolled the parchment-scroll, and read as 
follows: 

“The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts, 

All on a summer day: 

The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts 
And took them quite away!" 

“Consider your verdict,” the King said to the jury. 

“Not yet, not yet!” the Rabbit hastily interrupted. 
“There’s a great deal to come before that!” 

“Call the first witness,” said the King; and the White 
Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out 
“First witness!” 

The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a 
teacup in one hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the 
other. “I beg pardon, your Majesty,” he began, “for bring¬ 
ing these in; but I hadn’t quite finished my tea when I 
was sent for.” 

“You ought to have finished,” said the King. “When 
did you begin?” 

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had fol¬ 
lowed him into the court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. 
“Fourteenth of March, I think it was,” he said. 

“Fifteenth,” said the March Hare. 

“Sixteenth,” said the Dormouse. 

“Write that down,” the King said to the jury; and the 
jury eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, 
and then added them up, and reduced the answer to 
shillings and pence. 



WHO STOLE THE TARTS? 


107 


“Take off your hat,” the King said to the Hatter. 

“It isn’t mine,” said the Hatter. 

“Stolen!” the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who 
instantly made a memorandum of the fact. 

“I keep them to sell,” the Hatter added as an explana¬ 
tion. “I’ve none of my own. I'm a hatter.” 

Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began star¬ 
ing hard at the Hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted. 



“Give your evidence,” said the King; “and don’t be 
nervous, or I’ll have you executed on the spot.” 

This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he 
kept shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily 
at the Queen, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out 
of his teacup instead of the bread-and-butter. 

Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, 
which puzzled her a great deal until she made out what 
it was: she was beginning to grow larger again, and she 
thought at first she would get up and leave the court; but 
on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was 



io8 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 


as long as there was room for her. 

“I wish you wouldn’t squeeze so,” said the Dormouse, 
who was sitting next to her. "I can hardly breathe.” 

‘‘I ca’n’t help it,” said Alice very meekly: “I'm grow¬ 
ing.” 

“You’ve no right to grow here,” said the Dormouse. 

“Don’t talk nonsense,” said Alice more boldly: “you 
know you’re growing too.” 

“Yes, but / grow at a reasonable pace,” said the Dor¬ 
mouse: “not in that ridiculous fashion.” And he got up 
very sulkily and crossed over to the other side of the court. 

All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the 
Hatter, and, just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she 
said, to one of the officers of the court, “Bring me the list 
of the singers in the last concert!” on which the wretched 
Hatter trembled so, that he shook off both his shoes. 

“Give your evidence”, the King repeated angrily, “or 
I’ll have you executed, whether you are nervous or not.” 

“I’m a poor man, your Majesty,” the Hatter began, in 
a trembling voice, “and I hadn’t begun my tea—not 
above a week or so—and what with the bread-and-butter 
getting so thin—and the twinkling of the tea ” 

“The twinkling of what}” said the King. 

"It began with the tea,” the Hatter replied. 

"Of course twinkling begins with a T!” said the King 
sharply. "Do you take me for a dunce? Go on!” 

“I’m a poor man,” the Hatter went on, “and most 
things twinkled after that—only the March Hare 
said-” 

"I didn’t!” the March Hare interrupted in a great 
hurry. 

“You did!” said the Hatter. 

“I deny it!” said the March Hare. 

"He denies it,” said the King: “leave out that part.” 

“Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said-” the Hatter 

went on, looking anxiously round to see if he would deny 
it too; but the Dormouse denied nothing, being fast 
asleep. 



WHO STOLE THE TARTS? I09 

“After that’’, continued the Hatter, “I cut some more 
bread-and-butter-’ ’ 

“But what did the Dormouse* say?” one of the jury 
asked. 

“That I ca’n't remember”, said the Hatter. 

“You must remember”, remarked the King, “or I’ll 
have you executed.” 



The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread- 
and-butter, and went down on one knee. “I’m a poor man, 
your Majesty,” he began. 

"You’re a very poor speaker” said the King. 

Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immedi¬ 
ately suppressed by the officers of the court. (As that is 
rather a hard word, I will just explain to you how it was 
done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied up at the 
mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig, 
head first, and then sat upon it.) 

“I’m glad I’ve seen that done,” thought Alice. “I’ve so 
often read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, ‘There 
was some attempt at applause, which was immediately 
suppressed by the officers of the court,’ and I never under¬ 
stood what it meant till now.” 



no Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

“If that’s all you know about it, you may stand down,” 
continued the King. 

“I ca’n’t go no lower*” said the Hatter: “I’m on the 
floor, as it is.” 

“Then you may sit down,” the King replied. 

Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed. 

“Come, that finishes the guinea-pigs!” thought Alice. 
“Now we shall get on better.” 

"I’d rather finish my tea,” said the Hatter, with an 
anxious look at the Queen, who was reading the list of 
singers. 

“You may go,” said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly 
left the court, without even waiting to put his shoes on. 

“-and just take his head off outside,” the Queen 

added to one of the officers; but the Hatter was out of 
sight before the officer could get to the door. 

“Call the next witness!” said the King. 

The next witness was the Duchess’s cook. She carried 
the pepper-box in her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, 
even before she got into the court, by the way the people 
near the door began sneezing all at once. 

“Give your evidence,” said the King. 

"Sha’n’t,” said the cook. 

The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who 
said, in a low voice, “Your Majesty must cross-examine 
this witness.” 

“Well, if I must, I must,” the King said with a melan¬ 
choly air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the 
cook till his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said, in a 
deep voice, “What are tarts made of?” 

“Pepper, mostly,” said the cook. 

“Treacle,” said a sleepy voice behind her. 

“Collar that Dormouse!” the Queen shrieked out. “Be¬ 
head that Dormouse! Turn that Dormouse out of court! 
Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his whiskers!” 

For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, 
getting the Dormouse turned out, and, by the time they 
had settled down again, the cook had disappeared. 



Alice’s evidence 


hi 


“Never mind!’’ said the King, with an air of great re¬ 
lief. "Call the next witness.” And he added, in an under¬ 
tone to the Queen, “Really, my dear, you must cross- 
examine the next witness. It quite makes my forehead 
ache!” 

Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over 
the list, feeling very curious to see what the next witness 
would be like, “—for they haven’t got much evidence 
yet,” she said to herself. Imagine her surprise, when the 
White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, 
the name “Alice!” 


Chapter XII 
Alice’s Evidence 

“Here!” cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the 
moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, 
and she jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over 
the jury-box with the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the 
jurypien on to the heads of the crowd below and there they 
lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe 
of gold-fish she had accidentally upset the week before. 

“Oh, I beg your pardon!” she exclaimed in a tone of 
great dismay, and began picking them up again as quick¬ 
ly as she could, for the accident of the gold-fish kept run¬ 
ning in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea that 
they must be collected at once and put'back into the 
jury-box, or they would die. 

“The trial cannot proceed”, said the King, in a very 
grave voice, “until all the jurymen are back in their pro¬ 
per places— all,” he repeated with great emphasis, looking 
hard at Alice as he said so. 

Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, 
she had put the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor 



little thing was waving its tail about in a melancholy 
way, being quite unable to move. She soon got it out 
again, and put it right; “not that it signifies much,” she 
said to herself; “I should think it would be quite as much 
use in the trial one way up as the other.” 

As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock 
of being upset, and their slates and pencils had been 
found and handed back to them, they set to work very 
diligently to write out a history of the accident, all except 
the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do any- 











ALICE’S EVIDENCE 


113 

thing but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof 
of the court. 

“What do you know about this business?” the King 
said to Alice. 

“Nothing,” said Alice. 

“Nothing whatever?” persisted the King. 

“Nothing whatever,” said Alice. 

“That's very important,” the King said, turning to the 
jury. They were just beginning to write this down on 
their slates, when the White Rabbit interrupted: “Uni m- 
portant, your Majesty means, of course,” he said, in a very 
respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as 
he spoke. 

“^important, of course, I meant,” the King hastily 
said, and went on to himself in an undertone, “important 

—unimportant—unimportant—important-” as if he 

were trying which word sounded best. 

Some of the jury wrote it down “important”, and some 
"unimportant”. Alice could see this, as she was near 
enough to look over their slates; “but it doesn't matter a 
bit,” she thought to herself. 

At this moment the King, who had been for some time 
busily writing in his note-book, called out “Silence!” and 
read out from his book “Rule Forty-two. All persons 
more than a mile high to leave the court.” 

Everybody looked at Alice. 

“ I’m not a mile high,” said Alice. 

“You are,” said the King. 

“Nearly two miles high,” added the Queen. 

“Well, I sha’n’t go, at any rate,” said Alice; “besides, 
that’s not a regular rule: you invented it just now.” 

"It’s the oldest rule in the book,” said the King. 

“Then it ought to be Number One,” said Alice. 

The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. 
“Consider your verdict,” he said to the jury, in a low 
trembling voice. 

“There’s more evidence to come yet, please your Ma¬ 
jesty,” said the White Rabbit, jumping up in a great 



114 ALICE’S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND 

hurry: "this paper has just been picked up.” 

"What’s in it?” said the Queen. 

"I haven’t opened it yet,” said the White Rabbit; "but 
it seems to be a letter, written by the. prisoner to—to 
somebody.” 

"It must have been that,” said the King, "unless it was 
written to nobody, which isn’t usual, you know.” 

"Who is it directed to?” said one of the jurymen. 

"It isn’t directed at all,” said the White Rabbit: "in 
fact, there’s nothing written on the outside.” He unfolded 
the paper as he spoke, and added "It isn’t a letter, after 
all: it’s a set of verses.” 

"Are they in the prisoner’s handwriting?” asked an¬ 
other of the jurymen. 

"No, they’re not,” said the White Rabbit, "and that’s 
the queerest thing about it.” (The jury all looked puzz¬ 
led.) 

"He must have imitated somebody else’s hand,” said 
the King. (The jury all brightened up again.) 

"Please, your Majesty,” said the Knave, "I didn't 
write it, and they ca'n’t prove that I did: there’s no name 
signed at the end.” 

"If you didn’t sign it”, said the King, "that only makes 
the matter worse. You must have meant some mischief, 
or else you’d have signed.your name like an honest man.” 

There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was 
the first really clever thing the King had said that day. 

"That proves his guilt, of course,” said the Queen: "so, 
off with-” 

"It doesn't prove anything of the sort!” said Alice. 
"Why, you don’t even know what they’re about!” 

"Read them,” said the King; 

The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. "Where shall 
I begin, please your Majesty?” he asked. 

"Begin at the beginning”, the King said, very gravely, 
"and go on till you come to the end: then stop.” 

There was dead silence in the court, whilst the White 
Rabbit read out these verses: 



Alice’s evidence 


ii5 

‘ ‘ They told me you had been to her. 

And mentioned me to him: 

She gave me a good character. 

But said 1 could not swim. 

He sent them word I had not gone 
(We know it to be true): 

If she should push the matter on. 

What would become of you? 

I gave her one, they gave him two, 

You gave us three or more; 

They all returned from him to you, 

Though they were mine before. 

If I or she should chance to be 
Involved in this affair, 

He trusts to you to set them free, 

Exactly as we were. 

My notion was that you had been 
(Before she had this fit) 

A n obstacle that came between 
Him, and ourselves, and it. 

Don’t let him know she liked them best, 

For this must ever be 

A secret, kept from all the rest, 

Between yourself and me.” 

“That’s the most important piece of evidence we’ve 
heard yet,” said the King, rubbing his hands; “so now 
let the jury-” 

"If any one of them can explain it”, said Alice, (she 
had grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasn’t 
a bit afraid of interrupting him), “I’ll give him sixpence. 
I don’t believe there’s an atom of meaning in it.” 

The jury all wrote down, on their slates, “She doesn’t 
believe there’s an atom of meaning in it,” but none of 
them attempted to explain the paper. 

“If there’s no meaning in it,” said the King, “that 
saves a-world of trouble, you know, as we needn’t try to 



ii6 Alice's adventures in wonderland 

find any. And yet I don’t know,” he went on, spreading 
out the verses on his knee, and looking at them with one 
eye; “I seem to see some meaning in them, after all. 

‘—said I could not swim 
—’ you ca’n't swim, can 
you?” he added, turning 
to the Knave. 

The Knave shook his 
head sadly. “Do I look 
like it?” he said. (Which 
he certainly did not, being 
made entirely of card¬ 
board.) 

"All right, so far,” said 
the King; and he went on 
muttering over the verses 
to himself: “ ‘We know it 
to be true ’—that’s the 
jury, of course— ‘If she 
should push the matter on’ 
—that must be the Queen 
—‘What would become of 






JUjjljHMUHjaMBia 


V. : !S 






you?’ —What, indeed!— ‘I gave her one, they gave him 
two’ —why, that must be what he did with the tarts, you 
know-” 

"But it goes on ‘they all returned from him to you,’ ” 
said Alice. 























ALICE’S EVIDENCE 117 

“Why, there they are!” said the King triumphantly, 
pointing to the tarts on the table. “Nothing can be clearer 
than that. Then again —‘before she had this fit ’—you 
never had fits, my dear, I think?” he said to the Queen. 

“Never!” said the Queen, furiously, throwing an ink- 
stand at the Lizard as she spoke. (The unfortunate little 
Bill had left off writing on his slate with one finger, as he 
found it made no mark; but he now hastily began again, 
using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as 
it lasted .) 

“Then the words don’t fit you,” said the King looking 
round the court with a smile. There was a dead silence. 

“It’s a pun!” the King added in an angry tone, and 
everybody laughed. “Let the jury consider their verdict,” 
the King said, for about the twentieth time that day. 

“No, no!” said the Queen. “Sentence first—verdict 
afterwards.” 

“Stuff and nonsense!” said Alice loudly. “The idea of 
having the sentence first!” 

“Hold your tongue!” said the Queen, turning purple. 

“I wo’n't!” said Alice. 

"Off with her head!” the Queen shouted at the top of 
her voice. Nobody moved. 

"Who cares tor you?” said Alice (she had grown to her 
full size by this time). “You’re nothing but a pack of 
cards!” 

At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came 
flying down upon her; she gave a little scream, half of 
fright and half of anger, and tried to beat them off, and 
found herself lying on the bank, with her head in the lap 
of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead 
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her 
face. 

“Wake up, Alice dear!” said her sister. “Why, what a 
long sleep you’ve had!” 

“Oh, I’ve had such a curious dream!” said Alice. And 
she told her sister, as well as she could remember them, 
all these strange Adventures of hers that you have just 



been reading about; and, when she had finished, her sis¬ 
ter kissed her, and said “It was a curious dream, dear, cer¬ 
tainly; but now run in to your tea: it’s getting late.” So 
Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well 
she might, what a wonderful dream it had been. 

But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her 
head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking 
of little Alice and all her wonderful Adventures, till she 




Alice’s evidence 


119 

too began dreaming after a fashion, and this was her 
dream:— 

First, she dreamed about little Alice herself: once again 
the tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright 
eager eyes were looking up into hers—she could hear the 
very tones of her voice, and see that queer little toss of her 
head to keep back the wandering hair that would always 
get into her eyes—and still as she listened, or seemed to 
listen, the whole place around her became alive with the 
strange creatures of her little sister’s dream. 

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit 
hurried by—the frightened Mouse splashed his way 
through the neighbouring pool—she could hear the rattle 
of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends shared 
their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen 
ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution—once 
more the pig-baby was sneezing on the Duchess’s knee, 
while plates and dishes crashed around it—once more the 
shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard’s 
slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea- 
pigs, filled the air, mixed up with the distant sob of the 
miserable Mock Turtle. 

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed her¬ 
self in Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open 
them again, and all would change to dull reality—the 
grass would be only rustling in the wind, and the pool 
rippling to the waving of the reeds—the rattling teacups 
would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen’s 
shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd-boy—and the 
sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and all the 
other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the con¬ 
fused clamour of the busy farm-yard—while the lowing 
of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the 
Mock Turtle’s heavy sobs. 

Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister 
of hers would, in the after-time, be herself a grown wo¬ 
man; and how she would keep, through all her riper years, 
the simple and loving heart of her childhood; and how 



120 Alice’s adventures in wonderland 

she would gather about her other little children, and make 
their eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, 
perhaps even with the dream of Wonderland of long ago; 
and how she would feel with all their simple sorrows, and 
find a pleasure in all their simple joys, remembering- her 
own child-life, and the happy summer days. 



II 

Through the 
Looking-Glass 

and what Alice found there 





Child of the pure unclouded brow 
And dreaming eyes of wonder! 

Though time be fleet, and I and thou 
Are half a life asunder, 

Thy loving smile will surely hail 
The love-gift of a fairy-tale. 

I have not seen thy sunny face. 

Nor heard thy silver laughter: 

No thought of me shall find a place 
In thy young life’s hereafter — 

Enough that now thou wilt not fail 
To listen to my fairy-tale. 

A tale begun in other days, 

When summer suns were glowing — 

A simple chime, that served to time 
The rhythm of our rowing — 

Whose echoes live in memory yet, 

Though envious years would say "forget”. 

Come, hearken then, ere voice of dread. 
With bitter tidings laden. 

Shall summon to unwelcome bed 
A melancholy maiden! 

We are but older children, dear, 

Who fret to find our bedtime near. 

Without, the frost, the blinding snow. 

The storm-wind’s moody madness — 
Within, the firelight’s ruddy glow, 

And childhood’s nest of gladness. 

The magic words shall hold thee fast: 
Thou shalt not heed the raving blast. 

123 



And, though the shadow of a sigh 
May tremble through the story, 
For “happy summer days” gone by, 
And vanish'd summer glory — 

It shall not touch with breath of bale, 
Thepleasance of our fairy-tale. 


124 



RED 



W 11 I T E. 


White Pawn {Alice) to play, and win in eleven moves. 


PAGE 

1. Alice meets R. Q. 148 

2. Alice through Q’s 

3d [by railway) . 153 

to Q’s 4th 
[Tweedledum and 
Tweedledee) . . 155 

3. Alice meets W. Q. 

[with shawl ) . . 178 

4. Alice to Q’s 5th 

[shop, river, shop) 185 

5. Alice to Q’s 6th 

[Humpty Dumpty) 191 

6. Alice to Q’s 7th 

[forest) . . . 205 

7. W. Kt. takes R. Kt. 215 

8. Alice to Q’s 8th 

[coronation) . . 229 

9. Alice becomes Queen 229 

10. Alice castles [feast) 232 

11. Alice takes R. Q. 

& wins . . . 244 


PAGE 

1. R. Q. to K. R’s 4th 153 

2. W. Q. to Q. B’s 4th 

[after shawl) . . 179 


3. W. Q. to Q. B’s 5th 

[becomes sheep) . 185 

4. W. Q. to K. B's 8th 

(leaves egg on shelf) 190 

5. W. Q. to Q. B’s 8th 
[flyingfrom R.Kt.) 210 

6. R. Kt. to K's 2nd 

(ch.) .... 216 

7. W. Kt. to K. B’s 5th 229 

8. R. Q. to K’s sq. 

[examination) . 232 

9. Queens castle . . 237 

10. W. Q. to Q. R’s 6th 

[soup) . . . 240 


125 




PREFACE TO 1896 EDITION 


As the chess-problem, given on the previous page, has 
puzzled some of my readers, it may be well to explain that 
it is correctly worked out, so far as the moves are con¬ 
cerned. The alternation of Red and White is. perhaps not 
so strictly observed as it might be, and the “castling” of 
the three Queens is merely a way of saying that they en¬ 
tered the palace; but the “check” of the White King at 
move 6, the capture of the Red Knight at move 7, and the 
final “checkmate” of the Red King, will be found, by any 
one who will take the trouble to set the pieces and play 
the moves as directed, to be strictly in accordance with 
the laws of the game. 

The new words, in the poem “Jabberwocky” (see p. 
140), have given rise to some differences of opinion as to 
their pronunciation: so it may be well to give instructions 
on that point also. Pronounce “slithy” as if it were the two 
words “sly, the”: make the "g” hard in “gyre” and “gim- 
ble”: and pronounce “rath” to rhyme with “bath”. 

For this sixty-first thousand, fresh electrotypes have 
been taken from the wood-blocks (which, never having 
been used for printing from, are in as good condition as 
when first cut in 1871), and the whole book has been set 
up afresh with new type. If the artistic qualities of this re¬ 
issue fall short, in any particular, of those possessed by 
the original issue, it will not be for want of painstaking on 
the part of author, publisher, or printer. 

I take this opportunity of announcing that the Nursery 
“Alice”, hitherto priced at four shillings, net, is now to be 
had on the same terms as the ordinary shilling picture- 
books—although I feel sure that it is, in every quality (ex¬ 
cept the text itself, in which I am not qualified to pro¬ 
nounce), greatly superior to them. Four shillings was a 
perfectly reasonable price to charge, considering the very 

126 



PREFACE 


127 

heavy initial outlay I had incurred: still, as the Public 
have practically said, “We will not give more than a shill¬ 
ing for a picture-book, however artistically got-up,” I am 
content to reckon my outlay on the book as so much dead 
loss, and, rather than let the little ones, for whom it was 
written, go without it, I am selling it at a price which is, 
to me, much the same thing as giving it away. 

Christmas, 1896 










Chapter I 
Looking-Glass House 

One thing was certain, that the white kitten had had 
nothing to do with it—it was the black kitten’s fault en¬ 
tirely. For the white kitten had been having its face 
washed by the old cat for the last quarter of an hour 
(and bearing it pretty well, considering): so you see that 
it couldn’t have had any hand in the mischief. 

The way Dinah washed her children’s faces was this: 
first she held the poor thing down by its ear with one 
paw, and then with the other paw she rubbed its face all 
over, the wrong way, beginning at the nose: and just now, 
as I said, she was hard at work on the white kitten, which 
was lying quite still and trying to purr—no doubt feeling 
that it was all meant for its good. 

But the black kitten had been finished with earlier in 
the afternoon, and so, while Alice was sitting curled up in 
a corner of the great armchair, half talking to herself and 
half asleep, the kitten had been having a grand game of 
romps with the ball of worsted Alice had been trying to 
wind up, and had been rolling it up and down till it had 
all come undone again; and there it was, spread over the 

129 


130 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

hearth-rug, all knots and tangles, with the kitten running 
after its own tail in the middle. 

"Oh, you wicked, wicked little thing!” cried Alice, 
catching up the kitten, and giving it a little kiss to make 



it understand that it was in disgrace. "Really, Dinah 
ought to have taught you better manners! You ought, 
Dinah, you know you ought!” she added, looking re¬ 
proachfully at the old cat, and speaking in as cross a voice 
as she could manage—and then she scrambled back into 
the arm-chair, taking the kitten and the worsted with 

















LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE 


131 

her, and began winding up the ball again. But she didn’t 
get on very fast, as she was talking all the time, some¬ 
times to the kitten, and sometimes to herself. Kitty sat 
very demurely on her knee, pretending to watch the 
progress of the winding, and now and then putting out 
one paw and gently touching the ball, as if it would be 
glad to help if it might. 

"Do you know what to-morrow is, Kitty? ” Alice began. 
"You’d have guessed if you’d been up in the window with 
me—only Dinah was making you tidy, so you couldn’t. I 
was watching the boys getting in sticks for the bonfire— 
and it wants plenty of sticks, Kitty! Only it got so cold, 
and it snowed so, they had to leave off. Never mind, we’ll 
go and see the bonfire to-morrow.” Here Alice wound 
two or three turns of the worsted round the kitten’s neck, 
just to see how it would look: this led to a scramble, in 
which the ball rolled down upon the floor, and yards and 
yards of it got unwound again. 

"Do you know, I was so angry, Kitty,” Alice went on, 
as soon as they were comfortably settled again, "when I 
saw all the mischief you had been doing, I was very 
nearly opening the window, and putting you out into the 
snow! And you’d have deserved it, you little mischievous 
darling! What have you got to say for yourself? Now 
don’t interrupt me!” she went on, holding up one finger. 
"I’m going to tell you all your faults. Number one: you 
squeaked twice while Dinah was washing your face this 
morning. Now you ca’n’t deny it, Kitty: I heard you! 
What’s that you say?” (pretending that the kitten was 
speaking). "Her paw went into your eye? Well, that’s 
your fault, for keeping your eyes open—if you’d shut 
them tight up, it wouldn't have happened. Now don't 
make any more excuses, but listen! Number two: you 
pulled Snowdrop away by the tail just as I had put down 
the saucer of milk before her! What, you were thirsty, 
were you? How do you know she wasn’t thirsty too? Now 
for number three: you unwound every bit of the worsted 
while I wasn’t looking! 



132 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

"That’s three faults, Kitty, and you’ve not been pun¬ 
ished for any of them yet. You know I’m saving up all 
your punishments for Wednesday week—Suppose they 
had saved up all my punishments?’’ she went on, talking 
more to herself than the kitten. “What would they do at 
the end of a year? I should be sent to prison, I suppose, 
when the day came. Or—let me see—suppose each pun¬ 
ishment was to be going without a dinner: then, when 
the miserable day came, I should have to go without fifty 
dinners at once! Well, I shouldn’t mind that much! I’d 
far rather go without them than eat them! 

"Do you hear the snow against the window-panes, 
Kitty? How nice and soft it sounds! Just as if some one 
was kissing the window all over outside. I wonder if the 
snow loves the trees and fields, that it kisses them so 
gently? And then it covers them up snug, you know, with 
a white quilt; and perhaps it says ‘Go to sleep, darlings, 
till the summer comes again.’ And when they wake up in 
the summer, Kitty, they dress themselves all in green, 
and dance about—whenever the Wind blows—oh, that’s 
very pretty!” cried Alice, dropping the ball of worsted to 
clap her hands. "And I do so wish it was true! I’m sure the 
woods look sleepy in the autumn, when the leaves are 
getting brown. 

"Kitty, can you play chess? Now, don’t smile, my dear, 
I’m asking it seriously. Because, when we were playing 
just now, you watched just as if you understood it: and 
when I said ‘Check!’ you purred! Well, it was a nice 
check, Kitty, and really I might have won, if it hadn’t 
been for that nasty Knight, that came wriggling down 

among my pieces. Kitty, dear, let’s pretend-And 

here I wish I could tell you half the things Alice used to 
say, beginning with her favourite phrase "Let's pretend”. 
She had had quite a long argument with her sister only 
the day before—all because Alice had begun with “Let’s 
pretend we’re kings and queens”; and her sister, who 
liked being very exact, had argued that they couldn’t, 
because there were only two of them, and Alice had been 



LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE 


133 

reduced at last to say “Well, you can be one of them, 
then, and I'll be all the rest.” And once she had really 
frightened her old nurse by shouting suddenly in her ear, 
“Nurse! Do let's pretend that I’m a hungry hyaena, and 
you’re a bone!” 

But this is taking us away from Alice’s speech to the 
kitten. “Let’s pretend that you're the Red Queen, Kitty! 
Do you know, I think if you sat up and folded your arms, 
you’d look exactly like her. Now do try, there’s a dear!” 
And Alice got the Red Queen off the table, and set it up 
before the kitten as a model for it to imitate: however, 
the thing didn’t succeed, principally, Alice said, because 
the kitten wouldn’t fold its arms properly. So, to punish 
it, she held it up to the Looking-glass, that it might see 
how sulky it was, “—and if you’re not goo|d directly,” she 
added, “I’ll put you through into Looking-glass House. 
How would you like that ? 

“Now, if you’ll only attend, Kitty, and not talk so 
much, I’ll tell you all my ideas about Looking-glass 
House. First, there’s the room you can see through the 
glass—that’s just the same as our drawing-room, only the 
things go the other way. I can see all of it when I get upon 
a chair—all but the bit just behind the fireplace. Oh! I do 
so wish I could see that bit! I want so much to know 
whether they’ve a fire in the winter: you never can tell, 
you know, unless our fire smokes, and then smoke comes 
up in that room too—but that may be only pretence, just 
to make it look as if they had a fire. Well then, the books 
are something like our books, only the words go the 
wrong way: I know that, because I’ve held up one of our 
books to the glass, and then they hold up one in the other 
room. 

“How would you like to live in Looking-glass House, 
Kitty? I wonder if they’d give you milk in there? Perhaps 
Looking-glass milk isn’t good to drink—but oh, Kitty, 
now we come to the passage. You can just see a little peep 
of the passage in Looking-glass House, if you leave the 
door of our drawing-room wide open: and it’s very like 



134 


THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 



our passage as far as you can see, only you know it may 
be quite different on beyond. Oh, Kitty, how nice it 
would be if we could only get through into Looking-glass 
House! I’m sure it’s got, oh! such beautiful things in it! 
Let’s pretend there’s a way of getting through into it, 
somehow, Kitty. Let’s pretend the glass has got all soft 
like gauze, so that we can get through. Why, it’s turning 
into a sort of mist now, I declare! It’ll be easy enough to 

get through-” She was up on the chimney-piece while 

she said this, though she hardly knew how she had got 




















































































LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE 


135 



there. And certainly the glass was beginning to melt away, 
just like a bright silvery mist. 

In another moment Alice was through the glass, and 
had jumped lightly down into the Looking-glass room. 
The very first thing she did was to look whether there was 
a fire in the fireplace, and she was quite pleased to find 
that there was a real one, blazing away as brightly as the 
one she had left behind. “So I shall be as warm here as I 
was in the old room,” thought Alice: "warmer, in fact, 
because there'll be no one here to scold me away from the 



136 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

fire. Oh, what fun it'll be, when they see me through the 
glass in here, and ca’n’t get at me!” 

Then she began looking about, and noticed that what 
could be seen from the old room was quite common and 
uninteresting, but that all the rest was as different as 
possible. For instance, the pictures on the wall next the 
fire seemed to be all alive, and the very clock on the 
chimney-piece (you know you can only see the back of it 
in the Looking-glass) had got the face of a little old man, 
and grinned at her. 

“They don’t keep this room so tidy as the other,” Alice 
thought to herself, as she noticed several of the chessmen 
down in the hearth among the cinders; but in another 
moment, with a little “Oh!” of surprise, she was down on 
her hands and knees watching them. The chessmen were 
walking about, two and two! 

"Here are the Red King and the Red Queen,” Alice 
said (in a whisper, for fear of frightening them), “and 
there are the White King and the White Queen sitting 
on the edge of the shovel—and here are two Castles walk¬ 
ing arm in arm—I don’t think they can hear me,” she 
went on, as she put her head closer down, "and I'm 
nearly sure they ca’n’t see me, I feel somehow as if I was 
getting invisible-” 

Here something began squeaking on the table behind 
Alice, and made her turn her head just in time to see one of 
the White Pawns roll over and begin kicking: she watched 
it with great curiosity to see what would happen next. 

“It is the voice of my child!” the White Queen cried 
out, as she rushed past the King, so violently that she 
knocked him over among the cinders. “My precious Lily! 
My imperial kitten!” and she began scrambling wildly up 
the side of the fender. 

"Imperial fiddlestick!” said the King, rubbing his nose, 
which had been hurt by the fall. He had a right to be a 
little annoyed with the .Queen, for he was covered with 
ashes from head to foot. 

Alice was very anxious to be of use, and, as the poor 



LOOKINQ-GLASS HOUSE 137 

little Lily was nearly screaming herself into a fit, she 
hastily picked up the Queen and set her on the table by 
the side of her noisy little daughter. 

The Queen gasped, and sat down: the rapid journey 
through the air had quite taken away her breath, and for 
a minute or two she could do nothing but hug the little 
Lily in silence. As soon as she had recovered her breath 



a little, she called out to the White King, who was sitting 
sulkily among the ashes, “Mind the volcano!” 

“What volcano?” said the King, looking up anxiously 
into the fire, as if he thought that was the most likely 
place to find one. 

“Blew—me—up,” panted the Queen, who was still a 
little out of breath. “Mind you come up—the regular way 
—don’t get blown up!” 

Alice watched the White King as he slowly struggled 
up from bar to bar, till at last she said “Why, you’ll be 
hours and hours getting to the table, at that rate. I’d far 
better help you, hadn't I?” But the King took no notice 




138 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

of the question: it was quite clear that he could neither 
hear her nor see her. 

So Alice picked him up very gently, and lifted him 
across more slowly than she had lifted the Queen, that 
she mightn't take his breath away; but, before she put 
him on the table, she thought she might as well dust him 
a little, he was so covered with ashes. 



She said afterwards that she had never seen in all her 
life such a face as the King made, when he found himself 
held in the air by an invisible hand, and being dusted: he 
was far too much astonished to cry out, but his eyes and 
his mouth went on getting larger and larger, and rounder 
and rounder, till her hand shook so with laughing that 
she nearly let him drop upon the floor. 

“Oh! please don’t make such faces, my dear!” she cried 
out, quite forgetting that the King couldn’t hear her. 
“You make me laugh so that I can hardly hold you! And 
don’t keep your mouth so wide open! All the ashes will 



LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE 


139 

get into it—there, now I think you’re tidy enough!” she 
added, as she smoothed his hair, and set him upon the 
table near the Queen. 

The King immediately fell flat on his back, and lay 
perfectly still; and Alice was a little alarmed at what she 
had done, and went round the room to see if she could 



find any water to throw over him. However, she could 
find nothing but a bottle of ink, and when she got back 
with it she found he had recovered, and he and the Queen 
were talking together in a frightened whisper—so low, 
that Alice could hardly hear what they said. 

The King was saying “I assure you, my dear, I turned 
cold to the very ends of my whiskers!” 

To which the Queen replied “You haven’t got any 
whiskers.” 

“The horror of that moment”, the King went on, “I 
shall never, never forget!” 

“You will, though,” the Queen said, “if you don’t make 
a memorandum of it.” 

Alice looked on with great interest as the King took an 
enormous memorandum book out of his pocket, and 
began writing. A sudden thought struck her, and she took 


140 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

hold of the end of the pencil, which came some way over 
his shoulder, and began writing for him. 

The poor King looked puzzled and unhappy, and 
struggled with the pencil for some time without saying 
anything; but Alice was too strong for him, and at last he 
panted out “My dear! I really must get a thinner pencil. I 
ca’n’t manage this one a bit: it writes all manner of things 
that I don’t intend-” 

“What manner of things?” said the Queen, looking 
over the book (in which Alice had put ‘The White Knight 
is sliding down the poker. He balances very badly’). "That’s 
not a memorandum of your feelings!” 

There was a book lying near Alice on the table, and 
while she sat watching the White King (for she was still 
a little anxious about him, and had the ink all ready to 
throw over him, in case he fainted again), she turned over 
the leaves, to find some part that she could read, “—for it’s 
all in some language I don’t know,” she said to herself. 

It was like this. 


aavjoS vc&iHi a&i Vwt® aaojT’ 

•.adoos aM m aVSmV^Sswo a^v^VsG 

aM a-taos \\ k 

. ad»Tg$ wo istom awom a M « k 

She puzzled over this for some time, but at last a bright 
thought struck her. “Why, it’s a Looking-glass book, of 
course! And, if I hold it up to a glass, the words will all 
go the right way again.” 

This was the poem that Alice read 

JABBERWOCKY 

’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves 
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe: 

A ll mimsy were the borogoves, 

A nd the mome raths outgrabe. 









142 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

He took his vorpal sword in hand: 

Long time the manxome foe he sought — 

So rested he by the Tumtum tree. 

And stood awhile in thought. 

And, as in uffish thought he stood, 

The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame, 

Came whiffling through the tulgey wood, 

And burbled as it came! 

One, two! One, two! And through and through 
The vorpal blade went snicker-snack! 

He left it dead, and with its head 
He went galumphing back. 

“And hast thou slain the Jabberwock? 

Come to my arms, my beamish boy! 

O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!” 

He chortled in his joy. 

’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves 
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe: 

A ll mimsy were the borogoves, 

And the mome raths outgrabe. 

“It seems very pretty,” she said when she had finished 
it, “but it’s rather hard to understand!” (You see she 
didn’t like to confess, even to herself, that she couldn’t 
make it out at all.) “Somehow it seems to fill my head 
with ideas—only I don’t exactly know what they are! 
However, somebody killed something: that’s clear, at any 
rate-” 

“But oh!” thought Alice, suddenly jumping up, “if I 
don’t make haste, I shall have to go back through the 
Looking-glass, before I’ve seen what the rest of the house 
is like! Let’s have a look at the garden first!” She was out 
of the room in a moment, and ran down stairs—or, at 
least, it wasn’t exactly running, but a new invention for 
getting down stairs quickly and easily, as Alice said to 
herself. She just kept the tips of her fingers on the hand¬ 
rail, and floated gently down without even touching the 



THE GARDEN OF LIVE FLOWERS I43 

stairs with her feet: then she floated on through the hall, 
and would have gone straight out at the door in the same 
way, if she hadn't caught hold of the door-post. She was 
getting a little giddy with so much floating in the air, and 
was rather glad to find herself walking again in the natural 
way. 


Chapter II 

The Garden of Live Flowers 

“I should see the garden far better”, said Alice to her¬ 
self, "if I could get to the top of that hill; and here’s a 
path that leads straight to it—at least, no, it doesn’t do 

that -” (after going a few yards along the path, and 

turning several sharp corners), "but I suppose it will at 
last. But how curiously it twists! It’s more like a cork¬ 
screw than a path! Well this turn goes to the hill, I sup¬ 
pose—no, it doesn’t! This goes straight back to the house! 
Well then, I’ll try it the other way.” 

And so she did: wandering up and down, and trying 
turn after turn, but always coming back to the house, do 
what she would. Indeed, once, when she turned a corner 
rather more quickly than usual, she ran against it before 
she could stop herself. 

"It’s no use talking about it,” Alice said, looking up at 
the house and pretending it was arguing with her. “I'm 
not going in again yet. I know I should have to get 
through the Looking-glass again—back into the old room 
—and there’d be an end of all my adventures!” 

So, resolutely turning her back upon the house, she set 
out once more down the path, determined to keep straight 
on till she got to the hill. For a few minutes all went on 
well, and she was just saying "I really shall do it this time 



144 


THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 



-” when the path gave a sudden twist and shook itself 

(as she described it afterwards), and the next moment she 
found herself actually walking in at the door. 

“Oh, it's too bad!” she cried. “I never saw such a house 
for getting in the way! Never!” 

However, there was the hill full in sight, so there was 
nothing to be done but start again. This time she came 
upon a large flower-bed, with a border of daisies, and a 
willow-tree growing in the middle. 

“0 Tiger-lily!” said Alice, addressing herself to one that 





THE GARDEN OF LIVE FLOWERS I45 

was waving gracefully about in the wind, “I wish you 
could talk!” 

“We can talk”, said the Tiger-lily, “when there’s any¬ 
body worth talking to.” 

Alice was so astonished that she couldn’t speak for a 
minute: it quite seemed to take her breath away. At 
length, as the Tiger-lily only went on waving about, she 
spoke again, in a timid voice—almost in a whisper. “And 
can all the flowers talk?” 

“As well as you can,” said the Tiger-lily. “And a great 
deal louder.” 

“It isn’t manners for us to begin, you know,” said the 
Rose, “and I really was wondering when you’d speak! 
Said I to myself, ‘Her face has got some sense in it, though 
it’s not a clever one!’ Still, you’re the right colour, and 
that goes a long way.” 

“I don’t care about the colour,” the Tiger-lily re¬ 
marked. “If only her petals curled up a little more, she’d 
be all right.” 

Alice didn’t like being criticised, so she began asking 
questions. “Aren’t you sometimes frightened at being 
planted out here, with nobody to take care of you?” 

“There’s the tree in the middle,” said the Rose. “What 
else is it good for?” 

“But what could it do, if any danger' came?” Alice 
asked. 

“It could bark,” said the Rose. 

“It says ‘Boughwough!’ ” cried a Daisy. “That’s why 
its branches are called boughs!” 

“Didn’t you know that ?” cried another Daisy. And 
here they all began shouting together, till the air seemed 
quite full of little shrill voices. “Silence, every one of you!” 
cried the Tiger-lily, waving itself passionately from side 
to side, and trembling with excitement. “They know I 
ca’n’t get at them!” it panted, bending its quivering head 
towards Alice, “or they wouldn’t dare to do it!” 

“Never mind!” Alice said in a soothing tone, and, 
stooping down to the daisies, who were just beginning 

F L.C. 



146 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

again, she whispered “If you don’t hold your tongues, I'll 
pick you!” 

There was silence in a moment, and several of the pink 
daisies turned white. 

“That’s right!” said the Tiger-lily. “The daisies are 
worst of all. When one speaks, they all begin together, and 
it’s enough to make one wither to hear the way they go on!” 

“How is it you can all talk so nicely?” Alice said, 
hoping to get it into a better temper by a compliment. 
“I’ve been in many gardens before, but none of the 
flowers could talk.” 

“Put your hand down, and feel the ground,” said the 
Tiger-lily. “Then you’ll know why.” 

Alice did so. “It’s very hard,” she said; “but I don’t see 
what that has to do with it.” 

“In most gardens”, the Tiger-lily said, “they make the 
beds too soft—so that the flowers are always asleep.” 

This sounded a very good reason, and Alice was quite 
pleased to know it. “I never thought of that before!” she 
said. 

“It’s my opinion that you never think at all,” the Rose 
said, in a rather severe tone. 

“I never saw anybody that looked stupider,” a Violet 
said, so suddenly, that Alice quite jumped; for it hadn’t 
spoken before. 

“Hold your tongue!” cried the Tiger-lily. “As if you 
ever saw anybody! You keep your head under the leaves, 
and snore away there, till you know no more what’s 
going on in the world, than if you were a bud!” 

“Are there any more people in the garden besides me?” 
Alice said, not choosing to notice the Rose’s last remark. 

“There’s one other flower in the garden that can move 
about like you,” said the Rose. “I wonder how you do it 

-” (“You’re always wondering,” said the Tiger-lily), 

“but she's more bushy than you are.” 

“Is she like me?” Alice asked eagerly, for the thought 
crossed her mind, “There’s another little girl in the gar¬ 
den, somewhere!” 



THE GARDEN OF LIVE FLOWERS 147 

“Well, she has the same awkward shape as you,” the 
Rose said; “but she's redder—and her petals are shorter, 
I think.” 

“They're done up close, like a dahlia,” said the Tiger- 
lily: “not tumbled about, like yours.” 



“But that’s not your fault,” the Rose added kindly. 
“You're beginning to fade, you know—and then one ca'n't 
help one’s petals getting a little untidy.” 

Alice didn’t like this idea at all: so, to change the sub¬ 
ject, she asked “Does she ever come out here?” 

“I daresay you’ll see her soon,” said the Rose. “She’s 
one of the kind that has nine spikes, you know.” 

“Where does she wear them?” Alice asked with some 
curiosity. 



148 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

“Why, all round her head, of course,” the Rose replied. 
“I was wondering you hadn’t got some too. I thought it 
was the regular rule.” 

“She’s coming!” cried the Larkspur. “I hear her foot¬ 
step, thump, thump, along the gravel-walk!” 

Alice looked round eagerly and found that it was the 
Red Queen. “She’s grown a good deal!” was her first 
remark. She had indeed: when Alice first found her in the 
ashes, she had been only three inches high—and here she 
was, half a head taller than Alice herself! 

“It’s the fresh air that does it,” said the Rose: “wonder¬ 
fully fine air it is, out here.” 

“I think I’ll go and meet her,” said Alice, for, though 
the flowers were interesting enough, she felt that it would 
be far grander to have a talk with a real Queen. 

“You ca’n’t possibly do that,” said the Rose: “I should 
advise you to walk the other way.” 

This sounded nonsense to Alice, so she said nothing, 
but set oh at once towards the Red Queen. To her sur¬ 
prise she lost sight of her in a moment, arid found herself 
walking in at the front-door again. 

A little provoked, she drew back, and, after looking 
everywhere for the Queen (whom she spied out at last, a 
long way off), she thought she would try the plan, this 
time, of walking in the opposite direction. 

It succeeded beautifully. She had not been walking a 
minute before she found herself face to face with the Red 
Queen, and full in sight of the hill she had been so long 
aiming at. 

“Where do you come from?” said the Red Queen. 
“And where are you going? Look up, speak nicely, and 
don’t twiddle your fingers all the time.” 

Alice attended to all these directions, and explained, as 
well as she could, that she had lost her way. 

“I don’t know what you mean by your way,” said the 
Queen: “all the ways about here belong to me —but why 
did you come out here at all?” she added in a kinder tone. 
“Curtsey while you’re thinking what to say. It saves time.” 



THE GARDEN OF LIVE FLOWERS 149 

Alice wondered a little at this, but she was too much in 
awe of the Queen to disbelieve it. "I'll try it when I go 
home,” she thought to herself, “the next time I’m a little 
late for dinner.” 

“It’s time for you to answer now,” the Queen said 
looking at her watch: “open your mouth a little wider 
when you speak, and always say ‘your Majesty’.” 



“I only wanted to see what the garden was like, your 
Majesty-” 

“That’s right,” said the Queen, patting her on the head, 
which Alice didn’t like at all: “though, when you say 
‘garden’— I’ve . seen gardens, compared with which this 
would be a wilderness.” 

Alice didn’t dare to argue the point, but went on: 
“—and I thought I’d try and find my way to the top of 
that hill ” 

“When you say ‘hill’,” the Queen interrupted, “/ 
could show you hills, in comparison with which you’d call 
that a valley.” 

“No, I shouldn’t,” said Alice, surprised into contra¬ 
dicting her at last: “a hill ca’n’t be a valley, you know. 
That would be nonsense-” 








150 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

The Red Queen shook her head. “You may call it 'non¬ 
sense’ if you like,’’ she said, “but I’ve heard nonsense, 
compared with which that would be as sensible as a 
dictionary!” 

Alice curtseyed again, as she was afraid from the 
Queen’s tone that she was a little offended: and they walked 
on in silence till they got to the top of the little hill. 

For some minutes Alice stood without speaking, look¬ 
ing out in all directions over the country—and a most 
curious country it was. There were a number of tiny little 
brooks running straight across it from side to side, and 
the ground between was divided up into squares by a 
number of little green hedges, that reached from brook to 
brook. 

“I declare it’s marked out just like a large chess-board!” 
Alice said at last. “There ought to be some men moving 
about somewhere—and so there are!” she added in a tone 
of delight, and her heart began to beat quick with excite¬ 
ment as she went on. “It’s a great huge game of chess 
that’s being played—all over the world—if this is the 
world at all, you know. Oh, what fun it is! How I wish I 
was one of them! I wouldn’t mind being a Pawn, if only 
I might join—though of course I should like to be a 
Queen, best.” 

She glanced rather shyly at the real Queen as she said 
this, but her companion only smiled pleasantly, and said 
“That’s easily managed. You can be the White Queen’s 
Pawn, if you like, as Lily’s too young to play: and you’re 
in the Second Square to begin with: when you get to the 

Eighth Square you’ll be a Queen-” Just at this 

moment, somehow or other, they began to run. 

Alice never could quite make out, in thinking it over 
afterwards, how it was that they began: all she remembers 
is, that they were running hand in hand, and the Queen 
went so fast that it was all she could do to keep up with 
her: and still the Queen kept crying “Faster! Faster!” but 
Alice felt she could not go faster, though she had no 
breath left to say so. 



THE GARDEN OF LIVE FLOWERS 151 

The most curious part of the thing was, that the trees 
and the other things round them never changed their 
places at all: however fast they went, they never seemed 
to pass anything. “I wonder if all the things move along 
with us?” thought poor puzzled Alice. And the Queen 
seemed to guess her thoughts, for she cried “Faster! 
Don’t try to talk!” 



Not that Alice had any idea of doing that. She felt as 
if she would never be able to talk again, she was getting so 
much out of breath: and still the Queen cried “Faster! 
Faster!” and dragged her along. “Are we nearly there?” 
Alice managed to pant out at last. 

“Nearly there!” the Queen repeated. “Why, we passed 
it ten minutes ago! Faster!” And they ran on for a time 
in silence, with the wind whistling in Alice’s ears, and 
almost blowing her hair off her head, she fancied. 

“Now! Now!” cried the Queen. “Faster! Faster!” And 
they went so fast that at last they seemed to skim through 
the air, hardly touching the ground with their feet, till 
suddenly, just as Alice was getting quite exhausted, they 
stopped, and she found herself sitting on the ground, 
breathless and giddy. 













152 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

The Queen propped her up against a tree, and said 
kindly, “You may rest a little, now.” 

Alice looked round her in great surprise. “Why, I do 
believe we’ve been under this tree the whole time! Every¬ 
thing’s just as it was!” 

“Of course it is,” said the Queen. “What would you 
have it?” 

“Well, in our country”, said Alice, still panting a little, 
"you’d generally get to somewhere else—if you ran very 
fast for a long time as we’ve been doing.” 

“A slow sort of country!” said the Queen. “Now, here, 
you see, it takes all the running you can do, to keep in the 
same place. If you want to get somewhere else, you must 
run at least twice as fast as that!” 

“I’d rather not try, please!” said Alice. “I’m quite 
content to stay here—only I am so hot and thirsty!” 

“I know what you’d like!” the Queen said good- 
naturedly, taking a little box out of her pocket. “Have a 
biscuit?” 

Alice thought it would not be civil to say “No”, though 
it wasn’t at all what she wanted. She took it, and ate it as 
well as she could: and it was very dry: and she thought 
she had never been so nearly choked in all her life. 

"While you’re refreshing yourself”, said the Queen, “I'll 
just take the measurements.” And she took a ribbon out 
of her pocket, marked in inches, and began measuring the 
ground, and sticking little pegs in here and there. 

“At the end of two yards”, she said, putting in a peg to 
mark the distance, "I shall give you your directions— 
have another biscuit?” 

“No, thank you,” said Alice: “one’s quite enough!” 

“Thirst quenched, I hope?” said the Queen. 

Alice did not know what to say to this, but luckily the 
Queen did not wait for an answer, but went on. “At the 
end of three yards I shall repeat them—for fear of your 
forgetting them. At the end of four, I shall say good-bye. 
And at the end of five, I shall go!” 

She had got all the pegs put in by this time, and Alice 



THE GARDEN OF LIVE FLOWERS 153 

looked on with great interest as she returned to the tree, 
and then began slowly walking down the row. 

At the two-yard peg she faced round, and said “A 
pawn goes two squares in its first move, you know. So 
you’ll go very quickly through the Third Square—by 
railway, I should think—and you'll find yourself in the 
Fourth Square in no time. Well, that square belongs to 
Tweedledum and Tweedledee—the Fifth is mostly water 
—the Sixth belongs to Humpty Dumpty—But you make 
no remark?” 

“I—I didn’t know I had to make one—just then,” 
Alice faltered out. 

“You should have said,” the Queen went on in a tone 
of grave reproof, “ ‘It’s extremely kind of you to tell me 
all this’—however, we’ll suppose it said—the Seventh 
Square is all forest—however, one of the Knights will 
show you the way—and in the Eighth Square we shall be 
Queens together, and it’s all feasting and fun!” Alice got 
up and curtseyed, and sat down again. 

At the next peg the Queen turned again, and this time 
she said “Speak in French when you ca’n’t think of the 
English for a thing—turn out your toes as you walk—and 
remember who you are!” She did not wait for Alice to 
curtsey, this time, but walked on quickly to the next peg, 
where she turned for a moment to say “Good-bye”, and 
then hurried on to the last. 

How it happened, Alice never knew, but exactly as she 
came to the last peg, she was gone. Whether she vanished 
into the air, or whether she ran quickly into the wood 
(“and she can run very fast!” thought Alice), there was 
no way of guessing, but she was gone, and Alice began to 
remember that she was a Pawn, and that it would soon be 
time for her to move. 



Chapter III 


Looking-Glass Insects 

Of course the first thing to do was to make a grand sur¬ 
vey of the country she was going to travel through. “It’s 
something very like learning geography,” thought Alice, 
as she stood on tiptoe in hopes of being able to see a little 
further. “Principal rivers—there are none. Principal 
mountains—I’m on the only one, but I don’t think it’s got 
any name. Principal towns—why, what are those crea¬ 
tures, making honey down there? They ca’n’t be bees— 

nobody ever saw bees a mile off, you know-” and for 

some time she stood silent, watching one of them that was 
bustling about among the flowers, poking its proboscis 
into them, “just as if it was a regular bee,” thought 
Alice. 

However, this was anything but a regular bee: in fact, 
it was an elephant—as Alice soon found out, though the 
idea quite took her breath away at first. “And what enor¬ 
mous flowers they must be!” was her next idea. “Some¬ 
thing like cottages with the roofs taken off, and stalks put 
to them—and what quantities of honey they must make! 
I think I’ll go down and—no, I wo'n’t go just yet,” she 
went on, checking herself just as she was beginning to run 
down the hill, and trying to find some excuse for turning 
shy so suddenly. “It’ll never do to go down among them 
without a good long branch to brush them away—and 
what fun it’ll be when they ask me how I liked my walk. 

I shall say ‘Oh, I liked it well enough-’ (here came the 

favourite little toss of the head), ‘only it was so dusty and 
hot, and the elephants did tease so!’ ” 

“I think I’ll go down the other way,” she said after 
a pause; “and perhaps I may visit the elephants 
later on. Besides, I do so want to get into the Third 
Square!” 


154 



LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS 155 

So, with this excuse, she ran down the hill, and jumped 
over .the first of the six little brooks. 

* * * 

* * * * 

* * * * * 

“Tickets, please!” said the Guard, putting his head in at 
the window. In a moment everybody was holding out a 
ticket: they were about the same size as the people, and 
quite seemed to fill the carriage. 

“Now then! Show your ticket, child!” the Guard went 
on, looking angrily at Alice. And a great many voices all 
said together (“like the chorus of a song,” thought Alice) 
“Don’t keep him waiting, child! Why, his time is worth a 
thousand pounds a minute!” 

“I’m afraid I haven’t got one,” Alice said in a frightened 
tone: “there wasn’t a ticket-office where I came from.” 
And again the chorus of voices went on. “There wasn’t 
room for one where she came from. The land there is 
worth a thousand pounds an inch!” 

“Don’t make excuses,” said the Guard: “you should 
have bought one from the engine-driver.” And once more 
the chorus of voices went on with “The man that drives 
the engine. Why, the smoke alone is worth a thousand 
pounds a puff!” 

Alice thought to herself “Then there’s no use in speak¬ 
ing.” The voices didn’t join in, this time, as she hadn’t 
spoken, but, to her great surprise, they all thought in 
chorus (I hope you understand what thinking in chorus 
means—for I must confess that I don’t), “Better say 
nothing at all. Language is worth a thousand pounds a 
word!” 

“I shall dream about a thousand pounds to-night, I 
know I shall!” thought Alice. 

All this time the Guard was looking at her, first 
through a telescope, then through a microscope, and then 
through an opera-glass. At last he said “You’re travelling 
the wrong way,” and shut up the window, and went away. 



156 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

"So young a child”, said the gentleman sitting opposite 
to her, (he was dressed in white paper), "ought to know 
which way she’s going, even if she doesn’t know her own 
name!” 

A Goat that was sitting next to the gentleman in white, 
shut his eyes and said in a loud voice, “She ought to know 



her way to the ticket-office, even if she doesn’t know her 
alphabet!” 

There was a Beetle sitting next the Goat (it was a very 
queer carriage-full of passengers.altogether), and, as the 
rule seemed to be that they should all speak in turn, he 
went on with "She’ll have to go back from here as 
luggage!” 

Alice couldn’t see who was sitting beyond the Beetle, 

but a hoarse voice spoke next. “Change engines-” it 

said, and there it choked and was obliged to leave off. 

“It sounds like a horse,” Alice thought to herself. And 


















LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS 15 7 

an extremely small voice, close to her ear, said “You might 

make a joke on that—something about ‘horse’ and ‘hoarse’, you know.” 

Then a very gentle voice in the distance said, “She must 
be labelled ‘Lass, with care’, you know-” 

And after that other voices went on (“What a number 
of people there are in the carriage!” thought Alice), say¬ 
ing “She must go by post, as she’s got a head on her- 1 — 

“She must be sent as a message by the telegraph-” 

“She must draw the train herself the rest of the way-”, 

and so on. 

But the gentleman dressed in white paper leaned for¬ 
wards and whispered in her ear, “Never mind what they 
all say, my dear, but take a return-ticket every time the 
train stops.” 

“Indeed I sha’n’t!” Alice said rather impatiently. “I 
don’t belong to this railway journey at all—I was in a 
wood just now—and I wish I could get back there!” 

“You might make a joke on that,” said the little Voice close to 
her ear.' “something about ‘you would if you could’, you know.” 

“Don't tease so,” said Alice, looking about in vain to 
see where the voice came from. “If you're so anxious to 
have a joke made, why don’t you make one yourself?” 

The little voice sighed deeply. It was very unhappy, 
evidently, and Alice would have said something pitying 
to comfort it, “if it would only sigh like other people!” 
she thought. But this was such a wonderfully small sigh, 
that she wouldn’t have heard it at all, if it hadn’t come 
quite close to her ear. The consequence of this was that it 
tickled her ear very much, and quite took off her thoughts 
from the unhappiness of the poor little creature. 

“I know you are a friend,” the little Voice Went Oni “a dear fciend, 
and an old friend. And you wo’n’t hurt me, though I am an insect.” 

“What kind of insect?” Alice inquired, a little anxious¬ 
ly. What she really wanted to know was, whether it could 
sting or not, but she thought this wouldn’t be quite a civil 
question to ask. 

“What, then you don’t- 


•” the little voice began, when it was 



158 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

drowned by a shrill scream from the engine, and every¬ 
body jumped up in alarm, Alice among the rest. 

The Horse, who had put his head out of the window, 
quietly drew it in and said ‘Tt’s only a brook we have to 
j ump over. ’ ’ Everybody seemed satisfied with this, though 
Alice felt a little nervous at the idea of trains jumping at 
all. “However, it’ll take us into the Fourth Square, that’s 
some comfort!” she said to herself. In another moment 
she felt the carriage rise straight up into the air, and in 
her fright she caught at the thing nearest to her hand, 
which happened to be the Goat’s beard. 

***** 

* * * * 
***** 

But the beard seemed to melt away as she touched it, 
and she found herself sitting quietly under a tree—while 
the Gnat (for that was the insect she had been talking to) 
was balancing itself on a twig just over her head, and 
fanning her with its wings. 

It certainly was a very large Gnat: “about the size of a 
chicken,” Alice thought. Still, she couldn’t feel nervous 
with it, after they had been talking together so long. 

"—then you don’t like all insects?” the Gnat went on, 
as quietly as if nothing had happened. 

“I like them when they can talk,” Alice said. “None of 
them ever talk, where I come from.” 

“What sort of insects do you rejoice in, where you 
come from?” the Gnat inquired. 

“I don’t rejoice in insects at all,” Alice explained, “be¬ 
cause I’m rather afraid of them—at least the large kinds. 
But I can tell you the names of some of them.” 

“Of course they answer to their names?” the Gnat 
remarked carelessly. 

“I never knew them do it.” 

“What’s the use of their having names”, the Gnat said, 
“if they wo’n’t answer to them?” 

“No use to them,” said Alice; “but it’s useful to the 



LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS 159 

people that name them, I suppose. If not, why do things 
have names at all? ” 

“I ca’n’t say,” the Gnat replied. “Further on, in the 
wood down there, they’ve got no names—however, go on 
with your list of insects: you’re wasting time.” 

“Well, there’s the Horse-fly,” Alice began, counting off 
the names on her fingers. 



“All right,” said the Gnat. “Half way up that bush, 
you’ll see a Rocking-horse-fly, if you look. It’s made 
entirely of wood, and gets about by swinging itself from 
branch to branch.” 

“What does it live on?” Alice asked, with great curi¬ 
osity. 

“Sap and sawdust,” said the Gnat. “Go on with the 
list.” 

Alice looked at the Rocking-horse-fly with great 
interest, and made up her mind that it must have been 
just repainted, it looked so bright and sticky; and then 
she went on. 

“And there’s the Dragon-fly.” 

“Look on the branch above your head”, said the Gnat, 
“and there you'll find a Snap-dragon-fly. Its body is 








l6o THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

made of plum-pudding, its wings of holly-leaves, and its 
head is a raisin burning in brandy.” 

“And what does it live on?” Alice asked, as before. 
“Frumenty and mince-pie,” the Gnat replied; “and it 
makes its nest in a Christmas-box.” 

“And then there's the Butterfly,” Alice went on, after 
she had taken a good look at the insect with its head on 



fire, and had thought to herself, “I wonder if that’s the 
reason insects are so fond of flying into candles—because 
they want to turn into Snap-dragon-flies!” 

“Crawling at your feet”, said the Gnat (Alice drew her 
feet back in some alarm), “you may observe a Bread- 
and-butter-fly. Its wings are thin slices of bread-and- 
butter, its body is a crust, and its head is a lump of 
sugar.” 

"And what does it live on?” 

“Weak tea with cream in it.” 

A new difficulty came into Alice’s head. “Supposing it 
couldn’t find any?” she suggested. 

“Then it would die, of course.” 

“But that must happen very often,” Alice remarked 
thoughtfully. 



LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS 


161 


“It always happens,” said the Gnat. 

After this, Alice was silent for a minute or two ponder¬ 
ing. The Gnat amused itself meanwhile by humming 
round and round her head: at last it settled again and 
remarked “I suppose you don’t want to lose your name?” 

“No, indeed,” Alice said, a little anxiously. 

“And yet I don’t know,” the Gnat went on in a careless 



tone: “only think how convenient it would be if you could 
manage to go home without it! For instance, if the gover¬ 
ness wanted to call you to your lessons, she would call 

out ‘Come here-’, and there she would have to leave 

off, because there wouldn’t be any name for her to call, 
and of course you wouldn’t have to go, you know.” 

“That would never do, I’m sure,” said Alice: “the gov¬ 
erness would never think of excusing me lessons for that. 
If she couldn’t remember my name, she’d call me ‘Miss’, 
as the servants do.” 

"Well, if she said ‘Miss’, and didn’t say anything more,” 
the Gnat remarked, “of course you’d miss your lessons. 
That’s a joke. I wishyow had made it.” 

“Why do you wish I had made it?” Alice asked. “It’s a 
very bad one.” 




162 through the looking-glass 

But the Gnat only sighed deeply while two large tears 
come rolling down its cheeks. 

“You shouldn’t make jokes”, Alice said, “if it makes 
you so unhappy.” 

Then came another of those melancholy little sighs, and 
this time the poor Gnat really seemed to have sighed it¬ 
self away, for, when Alice looked up, there was nothing 
whatever to be seen on the twig, and, as she was getting 
quite chilly with sitting still so long, she got up and 
walked on. 

She very soon came to an open field, with a wood on the 
other side of it: it looked much darker than the last wood, 
and Alice felt a little timid about going into it. However, 
on second thoughts, she made up her mind to go on: “for 
I certainly won’t go back,” she thought to herself, and 
this was the only way to the Eighth Square. 

“This must be the wood”, she said thoughtfully to her¬ 
self, “where things have no names. I wonder what’ll 
become of my name when I go in? I shouldn’t like to lose 
it at all—because they’d have to give me another, and it 
would be almost certain to be an ugly one. But then the 
fun would be, trying to find the creature that had got my 
old name! That’s just like the advertisements, you know, 
when people lose dogs —‘answers to the name of “Dash”: 
had on a brass collar ’—just fancy calling everything you 
met ‘Alice’, till one of them answered! Only they wouldn’t 
answer at all, if they were wise.” 

She was rambling on in this way when she reached the 
wood: it looked very cool and shady. “Well, at any rate 
it’s a great comfort,” she said as she stepped under the 
trees, “after being so hot, to get into the—into the—into 
what?” she went on, rather surprised at not being able to 
think of the word. “I mean to get under the—under the— 
under this, you know!” putting her hand on the trunk of 
the tree. “What does it call itself, I wonder? I do believe 
it’s got no name—why, to be sure it hasn’t!” 

She stood silent for a minute, thinking: then she sud¬ 
denly began again. “Then it really has happened, after 



LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS 163 

all! And now, who am I? I will remember, if I can! I’m 
determined to do it!” But being determined didn’t help 
her much, and all she could say, after a great deal of 
puzzling, was “L, I know it begins with L!” 

Just then a Fawn came wandering by: it looked at 
Alice with its large gentle eyes, but didn’t seem at all 
frightened. ‘‘Here then! Here then!” Alice said, as she 



held out her hand and tried to stroke it; but it only 
started back a little, and then stood looking at her again. 

“What do you call yourself?” the Fawn said at last. 
Such a soft sweet voice it had! 

“I wish I knew!” thought poor Alice. She answered, 
rather sadly, “Nothing just now.” 

“Think again,” it said: "that wo’n’t do.” 

Alice thought, but nothing came of it. “Please, would 





164 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

you tell me what you call yourself?” she said timidly. “I 
think that might help a little.” 

“I'll tell you, if you'll come a little further on,” the 
Fawn said. “I ca’n’t remember here” 

So they walked on together through the wood, Alice 
with her arms clasped lovingly round the soft neck of the 
Fawn, till they came out into another open field, and here 
the Fawn gave a sudden bound into the air, and shook it¬ 
self free from Alice’s arm. “I’m a Fawn!” it cried out in a 
voice of delight. “And, dear me! you’re a human child!” 
A sudden look of alarm came into its beautiful brown eyes, 
and in another moment it had darted away at full speed. 

Alice stood looking after it, almost ready to cry with 
vexation at having lost her dear little fellow-traveler so 
suddenly. “However, I know my name now,” she said: 
“that’s some comfort. Alice—Alice—I won’t forget it 
again. And now which of these finger-posts ought I to 
follow, I wonder?” 

It was not a very difficult question to answer, as there 
was only one road through the wood, and the two finger¬ 
posts both pointed along it. “I’ll settle it”, Alice said to 
herself, "when the road divides and they point different 
ways.” 

But this did not seem likely to happen. She went on 
and on, a long way, but wherever the road divided, there 
were sure to be two finger-posts pointing the same way, 
one marked “TO TWEEDLEDUM’S HOUSE”, and the 
other “TO THE HOUSE OF TWEEDLEDEE”. 

“I do believe”, said Alice at last, “that they live in the 
same house! I wonder I never thought of that before- 
But I ca’n’t stay there long. I’ll just call and say ‘How 
d’ye do?’ and ask them the way out of the wood. If I 
could only get to the Eighth Square before it gets dark!” 
So she wandered on, talking to herself as she went, till, on 
turning a sharp corner, she came upon two fat little men, 
so suddenly that she could not help starting back, but in 
another moment she recovered herself, feeling sure that 
they must be 



Chapter IV 


Tweedledum and Tweedledee 

They were standing under a tree, each with an arm 
round the other’s neck, and Alice knew which was which 
in a moment, because one of them had ‘DUM’ em¬ 
broidered on his collar, and the other ‘DEE’. “I suppose 



they’ve each got ‘TWEEDLE’ round at the back of the 
collar,” she said to herself. 

They stood so still that she quite forgot they were alive, 
and she was just going round to see if the word 
‘TWEEDLE’ was written at the back of each collar, 
when she was startled by a voice coming from the one 
marked ‘DUM’. 

“If you think we’re wax-works,” he said, “you ought 
to pay, you know. Wax-works weren’t made to be looked 
at for nothing. Nohow!” 

165 





i66 


THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


“Contrariwise,” added the one marked ‘DEE’, “if you 
think we’re alive, you ought to speak.” 

“I’m sure I’m very sorry,” was all Alice could say; for 
the words of the old song kept ringing through her head 
like the ticking of a clock, and she could hardly help say¬ 
ing them out loud: 

‘ ‘ Tweedledum and Tweedledee 
Agreed to have a battle; 

For Tweedledum said Tweedledee 
Had spoiled his nice new rattle. 

Just then flew down a monstrous crow, 

As black as a tar-barrel; 

Which frightened both the heroes so, 

They quite forgot their quarrel.” 

“I know what you’re thinking about,” said Tweedle¬ 
dum; “but it isn’t so, nohow.” 

“Contrariwise,” continued Tweedledee, “if it was so, it 
might be; and if it were so, it would be; but as it isn’t, it 
ain’t. That’s logic.” 

“I was thinking,” Alice said politely, “which is the best 
way out of this wood: it’s getting so dark. Would you tell 
me, please?” 

But the fat little men only looked at each other and 
grinned,- 

They looked so exactly like a couple of great school¬ 
boys, that Alice couldn’t help pointing her finger at 
Tweedledum, and saying “First Boy!” 

“Nohow!” Tweedledum cried out briskly, and shut his 
mouth up again with a snap. 

“Next Boy!” said Alice, passing on to Tweedledee, 
though she felt quite certain he would only shout out 
“Contrariwise!” and so he did. 

“You’ve begun wrong!” cried Tweedledum. "The first 
thing in a visit is to say ‘How d’ye do?’ and shake hands!” 
And here the two brothers gave each other a hug, and 
then they held out the two hands that were free, to shake 
hands with her. 



TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE l6 7 

Alice did not like shaking hands with either of them 
first, for fear of hurting the other one’s feelings; so, as the 
best way out of the difficulty, she took hold of both hands 
at once: the next moment they were dancing round in a 
ring. This seemed quite natural (she remembered after¬ 
wards), and she was not even surprised to hear music 
playing: it seemed to come from the tree under which 
they were dancing, and it was done (as well as she could 
make it out) by the branches rubbing one across the 
other, like fiddles and fiddle-sticks. 

“But it certainly was funny”, (Alice said afterwards, 
when she was telling her sister the history of all this), “to 
find myself singing ‘Here we go round the mulberry bush’. 
I don’t know when I began it, but somehow I felt as if 
I’d been singing it a long long time!” 

The other two dancers were fat, and very soon out of 
breath. “Four times round is enough for one dance,” 
Tweedledum panted out, and they left off dancing as 
suddenly as they had begun: the music stopped at the 
same moment. 

Then they let go of Alice’s hands, and stood looking at 
her for a minute: there was a rather awkward pause, as 
Alice didn’t know how to begin a conversation with 
people she had just been dancing with. "It would never 
do to say ‘How d’ye do?’ now,” she said to herself: "we 
seem to have got beyond that, somehow!” 

“I hope you’re not much tired?” she said at last. 

“Nohow. And thank you very much for asking,” said 
Tweedledum. 

“So much obliged!” added Tweedledee. “You like 
poetry?” 

“Ye-es, pretty Well— some poetry,” Alice said doubt¬ 
fully. “Would you tell me which road leads out of the 
wood?” 

“What shall I repeat to her?” said Tweedledee, looking 
round at Tweedledum with great solemn eyes, and not 
noticing Alice’s question. 

“ ‘The Walrus and the Carpenter’ is the longest,” 



168 


THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


Tweedledum replied, giving his brother an affectionate 
hug. 

Tweedledee began instantly: 

“The sun was shining -” 

Here Alice ventured to interrupt him. “If it’s very 
long,” she said, as politely as she could, “would you 
please tell me first which road-’ ’ 

Tweedledee smiled gently, and began again: 

“The sun was shining on the sea, 

Shining with all his might: 

He did his very best to make 

The billows smooth and bright — 

And this was odd, because it was 
The middle of the night. 

The moon was shining sulkily. 

Because she thought the sun 

Had got no business to be there 
A fter the day was done — 

‘It’s very rude of him’; she said, 

‘T.o come and spoil the fun!’ 

The sea was wet as wet could be, 

The sands were dry as dry. 

You could not see a cloud, because 
No cloud was in the sky: 

No birds were flying overhead — 

There were no birds to fly. 

The Walrus and the Carpenter 
Were walking close at hand: 

They wept like anything to see 
Such quantities of sand: 

‘If this were only cleared away,’ 

They said, ‘it would be grand!’ 

‘If seven maids with seven mops 
Swept it for half a year. 



TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE 169 

Do you suppose', the Walrus said, 

‘That,they could get it clear?* 

‘I doubt it,’ said the Carpenter, 

And shed a bitter tear. 



‘O Oysters, come and walk with us!’ 

The Walrus did beseech. 

‘A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk, 

A long the briny beach: 

We cannot do with more than four. 

To give a hand to each.’ 

The eldest Oyster looked at him, 

But never a word he said: 

The eldest Oyster winked his eye. 

And shook his heavy head — 

Meaning to say he did not choose 
To leave the oyster-bed. 

But four young Oysters hurried up, 

A ll eager for the treat: 

Their coats were brushed, their faces washed, 
Their shoes were clean and neat — 

And this was odd, because, you know. 

They hadn’t any feet. 



THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


Four other Oysters followed them, 
And yet another four; 

A nd thick and fast they came at last, 
A nd more, and more, and more —- 
All hopping through the frothy waves. 
And scrambling to the shore. 



The Walrus and the Carpenter 
Walked on a mile or so. 

And then they rested on a rock 
Conveniently low: 

And all the little Oysters stood 
And waited in a row. 

‘The time has come', the Walrus said, 
‘To talk of many things: 

Of shoes—and ships—and sealing wax 
Of cabbages—and kings — 

And why the sea is boiling hot — 

And whether pigs have wings.’ 


‘But wait a bit,’ the Oysters cried, 
‘Before we have our chat; 





TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE 171 

For some of us are out of breath , 

And all of us are fat!’ 

‘No hurry!’ said the Carpenter. 

They thanked him much for that. 



‘A loaf of bread’, the Walrus said, 
‘Is what we chiefly need: 

Pepper and vinegar besides 
Are very good indeed —- 
Now, if you’re ready, Oysters dear, 
We can begin to feed.’ 

‘But not on us!’ the Oysters cried, 
Turning a little blue. 

‘After such kindness, that would be 
A dismal thing to do!’ 

‘The night is fine,’ the Walrus said. 
‘Do you admire the view? 

‘It was so kind of you to come! 

And you are very nice!’ 

The Carpenter said nothing but 
'Cut us another slice. 






172 


THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


I wish you were not quite so deaf — 

I’ve had to ask you twice!’ 

'It seems a shame’, the Walrus said, 

'Toplay them such a trick. 

After we’ve brought them out so far, 

And made them trot so quick!’ 

The Carpenter said nothing but 
'The butter’s spread too thick!’ 

‘I weep for you,’ the Walrus said: 

‘I deeply sympathize.’ 

With sobs and tears he sorted out 
Those of the largest size. 

Holding his pocket-handkerchief 
Before his streaming eyes. 

‘O Oysters,’ said the Carpenter, 

‘ You’ve had a pleasant run! 

Shall we be trotting home again?’ 

But answer came there none — 

And this was scarcely odd, because 
They’d eaten every one.” 

“I like the Walrus best,” said Alice: “because he was a 
little sorry for the poor oysters.” 

“He ate more than the Carpenter, though,” said 
Tweedledee. “You see he held his handkerchief in front, 
so that the Carpenter couldn’t count how many he took: 
contrariwise.” 

“That was mean!” Alice said indignantly. “Then I like 
the Carpenter best—if he didn’t eat so many as the Wal- 

,, , ft 

rus. 

“But he ate as many as he could get,” said Tweedle¬ 
dum. 

This was a puzzler. After a pause, Alice began, “Well! 

They were both very unpleasant characters-” Here she 

checked herself in some alarm, at hearing something that 
sounded to her like the puffing of a large steam-engine in 
the wood near them, though she feared it was more likely 



TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE 1 73 

to be a wild beast. "Are there any lions or tigers about 
here ? ’’ she asked timidly. 

“It’s only the Red King snoring,” said Tweedledee. 
“Come and look at him!” the brothers cried, and they 
each took one of Alice’s hands, and led her up to where 
the King was sleeping. 

“Isn’t he a lovely sight?” said Tweedledum. 




J ' /yl '•■w/j/ytyr '■ 





Alice couldn’t say honestly that he was. He had a tall 
red night-cap on, with a tassel, and he was lying crumpled 

up into a sort of untidy heap, and snoring loud-“fit to 

snore his head off!” as Tweedledum remarked. 

“I’m afraid he’ll catch cold with lying on the damp 
grass,” said Alice, who was a very thoughtful little 
girl. 

“He’s dreaming now,” said Tweedledee: “and what do 
you think he’s dreaming about?” 

Alice said “Nobody can guess that.” 

“Why, about you\” Tweedledee exclaimed, clapping his 
hands triumphantly. “And if he left off dreaming about 
you, where do you suppose you’d be?” 

“Where I am now, of course,” said Alice. 





174 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

“Not you!” Tweedledee retorted contemptuously. 
“You’d be nowhere. Why, you’re only a sort of thing in 
his dream!” 

“If that there King was to wake”, added Tweedledum, 
“you’d go out—bang!—just like a candle!” 

“I shouldn’t!” Alice exclaimed indignantly. “Besides, 
if I’m only a sort of thing in his dream, what are you, I 
should like to know? ’ ’ 

“Ditto,” said Tweedledum. 

“Ditto, ditto!” cried Tweedledee. 

He shouted this so loud that Alice couldn’t help saying 
“Hush! You’ll be waking him, I’m afraid, if you make 
so much noise.” 

“Well, it’s no use your talking about waking him,” said 
Tweedledum, “when you’re only one of the things in his 
dream. You know very well you’re not real.” 

“I am real!” said Alice, and began to cry. 

“You wo’n’t make yourself a bit realler by crying,” 
Tweedledee remarked: “there’s nothing to cry about.” 

“If I wasn’t real”, Alice said—half laughing through 
her tears, it all seemed so ridiculous—“I shouldn’t be able 
to cry.” 

“I hope you don’t suppose those are real tears?” 
Tweedledum interrupted in a tone of great contempt. 

“I know they’re talking nonsense,” Alice thought to 
herself: “and it’s foolish to cry about it.” So she brushed 
away her tears, and went on, as cheerfully as she could, 
“At any rate, I’d better be getting out of the wood, for 
really it’s coming on very dark. Do you think it’s going to 
rain?” 

Tweedledum spread a large umbrella over himself and 
his brother, and looked up into it. “No, I don’t think it 
is,” he said: "at least—not under here. Nohow.” 

“But it may rain outside ?” 

"It may—if it chooses,” said Tweedledee: "we’ve no 
objection. Contrariwise.” 

“Selfish things!” thought Alice, and she was just going 
to say “Good-night” and leave them, when Tweedledum 



TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE 175 

sprang out from under the umbrella, and seized her by 
the wrist. 

“Do you see that}” he said, in a voice choking with 
passion, and his eyes grew large and yellow all in a 
moment, as he pointed with a trembling finger at a small 
white thing lying under the tree. 

“It’s only a rattle,” Alice said, after a careful examina¬ 



tion of the little white thing. “Not a rattl e-snake, you 
know,” she added hastily, thinking that he was fright¬ 
ened: “only an old rattle—quite old and broken.” 

“I know it was!” cried Tweedledum, beginning to 
stamp about wildly and tear his hair. “It’s spoilt, of 
course!” Here he looked at Tweedledee, who immediately 
sat down on the ground, and tried to hide himself under 
the umbrella. 

Alice laid her hand upon his arm and said, in a soothing 
tone, “You needn’t be so angry about an old rattle.” 

“But it isn’t old!” Tweedledum cried, in a greater fury 
than ever. “It’S new, I tell you—I bought it yesterday— 





176 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

my nice new RATTLE!” and his voice rose to a perfect 
scream. 

All this time Tweedledee was trying his best to fold up 
the umbrella, with himself in it: which was such an extra¬ 
ordinary thing to do, that it quite took off Alice's atten¬ 
tion from the angry brother. But he couldn’t quite suc¬ 
ceed, and it ended in his rolling over, bundling up in 
the umbrella, with only his head out: and there he lay, 
opening and shutting his mouth and his large eyes 

-“looking more like a fish than anything else,” Alice 

thought. 

“Of course you agree to have a battle?” Tweedledum 
said in a calmer tone. 

“I suppose so,” the other sulkily replied, as he crawled 
out of the umbrella: “only she must help us to dress up, 
you know.” 

So the two brothers went off hand-in-hand into the 
wood, and returned in a minute with their arms full of 
things—such as bolsters, blankets, hearth-rugs, table¬ 
cloths, dish-covers, and coal-scuttles. “I hope you’re a 
good hand at pinning and tying strings?” Tweedledum 
remarked. “Every one of these things has got to go on, 
somehow or other.” 

Alice said afterwards she had never seen such a fuss 
made about anything in all her life—the way those two 
bustled about—and the quantity of things they put on— 
and the trouble they gave her in tying strings and fasten¬ 
ing buttons—“Really they’ll be more like bundles of old 
clothes than anything else, by the time they’re ready!” 
she said to herself, as she arranged a bolster round the 
neck of Tweedledee, “to keep his head from being cut 
off,” as he said. 

“You know,” he added very gravely, “it’s one of the 
most serious things that can possibly happen to one in a 
battle—to get one’s head cut off.” 

Alice laughed loud: but she managed to turn it into a 
cough, for fear of hurting his feelings. 

“Do I look very pale?” said Tweedledum, coming up to 



TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE 177 

have his helmet tied on. (He called it a helmet, though it 
certainly looked much more like a saucepan.) 

“Well—yes—a little,” Alice replied gently. 

“I’m very brave, generally,” he went on in a low voice: 
“only to-day I happen to have a headache.” 

“And I’ve got a toothache!” said Tweedledee, who had 
overheard the remark. “I’m far worse than you!” 



“Then you’d better not fight to-day,” said Alice, think¬ 
ing it a good opportunity to make peace. 

“We must have a bit of a fight, but I don’t care about 
going on long,” said Tweedledum. “What’s the time 
now?” 

Tweedledee looked at his watch, and said “Half-past 
four.” 

“Let’s fight till six, and then have dinner,” said 
Tweedledum. 

“Very well,” the other said, rather sadly: “and she can 
watch us—only you’d better not come very close,” he 





178 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

added: “I generally hit every thing I can see—when I get 
really excited.” 

“And I hit every thing within reach,” cried Tweedle¬ 
dum, “whether I can see it or not!” 

Alice laughed. “You must hit the trees pretty often, I 
should think,” she said. 

Tweedledum looked round him with a satisfied smile. 
“I don’t suppose”, he said, “there’ll be a tree left stand¬ 
ing, for ever so far round, by the time we’ve finished!” 

“And all about a rattle!” said Alice, still hoping to 
make them a little ashamed of fighting for such a trifle. 

“I shouldn’t have minded it so much”, said Tweedle¬ 
dum, “if it hadn’t been a new one.” 

“I wish the monstrous crow would come!” thought 
Alice. 

“There’s only one sword, you know,” Tweedledum said 
to his brother: “but you can have the umbrella—it’s quite 
as sharp. Only we must begin quick. It’s getting as dark 
as it can.” 

“And darker,” said Tweedledee. 

It was getting dark so suddenly that Alice thought 
there must be a thunderstorm coming on. “What a thick 
black cloud that is!” she said. “And how fast it comes! 
Why, I do believe it’s got wings!” 

“It’s the crow!” Tweedledum cried out in a shrill voice 
of alarm; and the two brothers took to their heels and 
were out of sight in a moment. 

Alice ran a little way into the wood, and stopped under 
a large tree. “It can never get at me here,” she thought: 
“it’s far too large to squeeze itself in among the trees. But 
I wish it wouldn’t flap its wings so—it makes quite a 
hurricane in the wood—here’s somebody’s shawl being 
blown away!” 



Chapter V 


Wool and Water 

She caught the shawl as she spoke, and looked about 
for the owner: in another moment the White Queen 
came running wildly through the wood, with both arms 
stretched out wide, as if she were flying, and Alice very 
civilly went to meet her with the shawl. 

“I’m very glad I happened to be in the way,” Alice 
said, as she helped her to put on her shawl again. 

The White Queen only looked at her in a helpless 
frightened sort of way, and kept repeating something in a 
whisper to herself that sounded like “Bread-and-butter, 
bread-and-butter”, and Alice felt that if there was to be 
any conversation at all, she must manage it herself. So 
she began rather timidly: “Am I addressing the White 
Queen?” 

“Well, yes, if you call that a-dressing,” the Queen said. 
“It isn’t my notion of the thing, at all.” 

Alice thought it would never do to have an argument 
at the very beginning of their conversation, so she smiled 
and said “If your Majesty will only tell me the right way 
to begin. I’ll do it as well as I can.” 

“But I don’t want it done at all!” groaned the poor 
Queen. “I’ve been a-dressing myself for the last two 
hours.” 

It would have been all the better, as it seemed to Alice, 
if she had got some one else to dress her, she was so 
dreadfully untidy. “Every single thing’s crooked,” Alice 

thought to herself, “and she’s all over pins!-May I put 

your shawl straight for you?” she added aloud. 

“I don’t know what’s the matter with it!” the Queen 
said, in a melancholy voice. “It’s out of temper, I think. 
I’ve pinned it here, and I’ve pinned it there, but there’s 
no pleasing it!” 

“It ca’rit go straight, you know, if you pin it all on one 

179 



l8o THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

side,” Alice said, as she gently put it right for her; “and 
dear me, what a state your hair is in!” 

“The brush has got entangled in it!” the Queen said 
with a sigh. “And I lost the comb yesterday.” 

Alice carefully released the brush, and did her best to 
get the hair into order. “Come, you look rather better 



now!” she said, after altering most of the pins. “But 
really you should have a lady’s-maid!” 

“I’m sure I’ll take you with pleasure!” the Queen said. 
“Two pence a week and jam every other day.” 

Alice couldn’t help laughing, as she said “I don’t want 
you to hire me —and I don’t care for jam.” 

“It’s very good jam,” said the Queen. 

“Well, I don’t want any to-day, at any rate.” 




WOOL AND WATER 


181 

“You couldn’t have it if you did want it,” the Queen 
said. “The rule is, jam to-morrow and jam yesterday— 
but never jam to-day.” 

“It must come sometimes to ‘jam to-day’,” Alice ob¬ 
jected. 

“No, it ca’n’t,” said the Queen. “It’s jam every other 
day: to-day isn’t any other day, you know.” 

“I don’t understand you,” said Alice. “It’s dreadfully 
confusing!” 

"That’s the effect of living backwards,” the Queen 
said kindly: “it always makes one a little giddy at 
first-” 

"Living backwards!” Alice repeated in great astonish¬ 
ment. “I never heard of such a thing!” 

“—but there’s one great advantage in it, that one’s 
memory works both ways.” 

“I’m sure mine only works one way,” Alice remarked. 
“I ca’n’t remember things before they happen.” 

“It’s a poor sort of memory that only works back¬ 
wards,” the Queen remarked. 

“What sort of things do you remember best?” Alice 
ventured to ask. 

“Oh, things that happened the week after next,” the 
Queen replied in a careless tone. "For instance, now,” she 
went on, sticking a large piece of plaster on her finger as 
she spoke, "there’s the King’s Messenger. He’s in prison 
now, being punished: and the trial doesn’t even begin till 
next Wednesday: and of course the crime comes last of 
all.” 

"Suppose he never commits the crime?” said Alice. 

“That would be all the better, wouldn’t it?” the Queen 
said, as she bound the plaster round her finger with a bit 
of ribbon. 

Alice felt there was no denying that. “Of course it 
would be all the better,” she said: “but it wouldn’t be all 
the better his being punished.” 

“You’re wrong there, at any rate,” said the Queen. 

‘ ‘Were you ever punished ? ’ ’ 



i 82 


THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


"Only for faults,” said Alice. 

"And you were all the better for it, I know!” the Queen 
said triumphantly. 

"Yes, but then I had done the things I was punished 
for,” said Alice: “that makes all the difference.” 

"But if you hadn’t done them”, the Queen said, "that 
would have been better still; better, and better, and bet¬ 



ter! Her voice went higher with each "better”, till it got 
quite to a squeak at last. 

Alice was just beginning to say "There’s a mistake 

somewhere-,” when the Queen began screaming, so 

loud that she had to leave the sentence unfinished. "Oh, 
oh, oh!” shouted the Queen, shaking her hand about as 
if she wanted to shake it off. “My finger’s bleeding! Oh, 
oh, oh, oh!” 

Her screams were so exactly like the whistle of a steam- 











WOOL AND WATER 183 

engine, that Alice had to hold both her hands over her 
ears. 

“What is the matter?” she said, as soon as there was a 
chance of making herself heard. “Have you pricked your 
finger?” 

“I haven’t pricked it yet,” the Queen said, “but I soon 
shall—oh, oh, oh!” 

“When do you expect to do it?” Alice said, feeling very 
much inclined to laugh. 

“When I fasten my shawl again,” the poor Queen 
groaned out: “the brooch will come undone directly. Oh, 
oh!” As she said the words the brooch flew open, and 
the Queen clutched wildly at it, and tried to clasp it 
again. 

“Take care!” cried Alice. “You’re holding it all 
crooked!” And she caught at the brooch; but it was too 
late: the pin had slipped, and the Queen had pricked her 
finger. 

“That accounts for the bleeding, you see,” she said to 
Alice with a smile. “Now you understand the way things 
happen here.” 

“But why don’t you scream now?” Alice asked, holding 
her hands ready to put over her ears again. 

“Why, I’ve done all the screaming already,” said the 
Queen. “What would be the good of having it all over 
again?” 

By this time it was getting light. “The crow must have 
flown away, I think,” said Alice: “I’m so glad it’s gone. I 
thought it was the night coming on.” 

“I wish I could manage to be glad!” the Queen said. 
“Only I never can remember the rule. You must be very 
happy, living in this wood, and being glad whenever you 
like!” 

"Only it is so very lonely here!” Alice said in a melan¬ 
choly voice; and, at the thought of her loneliness, two 
large tears came rolling down her cheeks. 

“Oh, don’t go on like that!” cried the poor Queen, 
wringing her hands in despair. “Consider what a great 



184 through the looking-glass 

girl you are. Consider what a long way you’ve come to¬ 
day. Consider what o’clock it is. Consider anything, only 
don’t cry!” 

Alice could not help laughing at this, even in the midst 
of her tears. “Can you keep from crying by considering 
things?” she asked. 

“That’s the way it’s done,” the Queen said with great 
decision: “nobody can do two things at once, you know. 
Let’s consider your age to begin with—how old are you?” 

“I’m seven and a half, exactly.” 

“You needn’t say ‘exactly’,” the Queen remarked. “I 
can believe it without that. Now I’ll give you something 
to believe. I’m just one hundred and one, five months and 
a day.” 

“I ca’n’t believe that\” said Alice. 

“Ca’n’t you?” the Queen said in a pitying tone. “Try 
again: draw a long breath, and shut your eyes.” 

Alice laughed. “There’s no use trying,” she said “one 
ca’n’t believe impossible things.” 

“I daresay you haven’t had much practice,” said the 
Queen. “When I was your age, I always did it for half-an- 
hour a day. Why, sometimes I’ve believed as many as six 
impossible things before breakfast. There goes the shawl 
again!” 

The brooch had come undone as she spoke, and a sud¬ 
den gust of wind blew the Queen’s shawl across a little 
brook. The Queen spread out her arms again and went 
flying after it, and this time she succeeded in catching it 
herself. "I’ve got it!” she cried in triumphant tone. "Now 
you shall see me pin it on again, all by myself!” 

“Then I hope your finger is better now?” Alice said 
very politely, as she crossed the little brook after the 
Queen. 



WOOL AND WATER 


185 

"Oh, much better!" cried the Queen, her voice rising 
into a squeak as she went on. “Much be-etter! Be-etter! 
Be-e-e-etter! Be-e-ehh!" The last word ended in a long 
bleat, so like a sheep that Alice quite started. 

She looked at the Queen, who seemed to have suddenly 
wrapped herself up in wool. Alice rubbed her eyes, and 
looked again. She couldn’t make out what had happened 
at all. Was she in a shop? And was that really—was it 
really a sheep that was sitting on the other side of the 
counter? Rub as she would, she could make nothing more 
of it: she was in a little dark shop, leaning with her elbows 
on the counter, and opposite to her was an old Sheep, sit¬ 
ting in an arm-chair, knitting, and every now and then 
leaving off to look at her through a great pair of spec¬ 
tacles. 

"What is it you want to buy?" the Sheep said at last, 
looking up for a moment from her knitting. 

“I don’t quite know yet," Alice said very gently. “I 
should like to look all round me first, if I might." 

"You may look in front of you, and on both sides, if 
you like," said the Sheep; “but you ca’n’t look all round 
you—unless you’ve got eyes at the back of your head." 

But these, as it happened, Alice had not got: so she con¬ 
tented herself with turning round, looking at the shelves 
as she came to them. 

The shop seemed to be full of all manner of curious 
things—but the oddest part of it all was that, whenever 
she looked hard at any shelf, to make out exactly what it 
had on it, that particular shelf was always quite empty, 
though the others round it were crowded as full as they 
could hold. 

"Things flow about so here!” she said at last in a plain¬ 
tive tone, after she had spent a minute or so in vainly pur¬ 
suing a large bright thing that looked sometimes like a 
doll and sometimes like a work-box, and was always in 
the shelf next above the one she was looking at. "And 
this one is the most provoking of all—but I’ll tell you 
what-" she added, as a sudden thought struck her. 



i86 


THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 



“I’ll follow it up to the very top shelf of all. It’ll puzzle it 
to go through the ceiling, I expect!’’ 

But even this plan failed: the “thing” went through the 
ceiling as quietly as possible, as if it were quite used to it. 

“Are you a child or a teetotum?” the Sheep said, as she 
took up another pair of needles. “You’ll make me giddy 
soon, if you go on turning round like that.” She was now 
working with fourteen pairs at once, and Alice couldn’t 
help looking at her in great astonishment. 

“How can she knit with so many?” the puzzled child 
thought to herself. “She gets more and more like a porcu¬ 
pine every minute!” 

“Can you row?” the Sheep asked, handing her a pair of 
knitting-needles as she spoke. 





























WOOL AND WATER 


187 

“Yes, a little—but not on land—and not with needles 

-” Alice was beginning to say, when suddenly the 

needles turned into oars in her hands, and she found they 
were in a little boat, gliding along between banks: so 
there was nothing for it but to do her best. 

“Feather!” cried the Sheep, as she took up another pair 
of needles. 

This didn’t sound like a remark that needed any an¬ 
swer: so Alice said nothing, but pulled away. There was 
something very queer about the water, she thought, as 
every now and then the oars got fast in it, and would 
hardly come out again. 

“Feather! Feather!” the Sheep cried again, taking 
more needles. “You’ll be catching a crab directly.” 

“A dear little crab!” thought Alice. “I should like that. ” 

“Didn’t you hear me say ‘Feather’?” the Sheep cried 
angrily, taking up quite a bunch of needles. 

“Indeed I did,” said Alice: "you’ve said it very often— 
and very loud. Please where are the crabs?” 

“In the water, of course!” said the Sheep, sticking 
some of the needles into her hair, as her hands were full. 
“Feather, Isay!” 

“Why do you say ‘Feather’ so often?” Alice asked at 
last, rather vexed. "I’m not a bird!” 

“You are,” said the Sheep: “you’re a little goose.” 

This offended Alice a little, so there was no more con¬ 
versation for a minute or two, while the boat glided gent¬ 
ly on, sometimes among beds of weeds (which made the 
oars stick fast in the water, worse than ever), and some¬ 
times under trees, but always with the same tall river- 
banks frowning over their heads. 

“Oh, please! There are some scented rushes!” Alice 
cried in a sudden transport of delight. "There really are— 
and such beauties! ’ ’ 

“You needn’t say ‘please’ to me about ’em,” the Sheep 
said, without looking up from her knitting: “I didn’t put 
'em there, and I’m not going to take ’em away.” 

“No, but I meant—please, may we wait and pick 



l88 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

some?” Alice pleaded. “If you don't mind stopping the 
boat for a minute.” 

“How am I to stop it?” said the Sheep. “If you leave 
off rowing, it’ll stop of itself.” 

So the boat was left to drift down the stream as it 
would, till it glided gently in among the waving rushes. 
And then the little sleeves were carefully rolled up, and 
the little arms were plunged in elbow-deep, to get hold of 
the rushes a good long way down before breaking them 
off—and for a while Alice forgot all about the Sheep and 
the knitting, as she bent over the side of the boat, with 
just the ends of her tangled hair dipping into the water— 
while with bright eager eyes she caught at one bunch after 
another of the darling scented rushes. 

“I only hope the boat wo’n’t tipple over!” she said to 
herself. “Oh, what a lovely one! Only I couldn’t quite 
reach it.” And it certainly did seem a little provoking 
(“almost as if it happened on purpose,” she thought) 
that, though she managed to pick plenty of beautiful 
rushes as the boat glided by, there was always a more 
lovely one that she couldn’t reach. 

“The prettiest are always further!” she said at last with 
a sigh at the obstinacy of the rushes in growing so far off, 
as, with flushed cheeks and dripping hair and hands, she 
scrambled back into her place, and began to arrange her 
new-found treasures. 

What mattered it to her just then that the rushes had 
begun to fade, and to lose all their scent and beauty, from 
the very moment that she picked them? Even real scented 
rushes, you know, last only a very little while—and these, 
being dream-rushes, melted away almost like snow, as 
they lay in heaps at her feet—but Alice hardly noticed this, 
there were so many other curious things to think about. 

They hadn’t gone much farther before the blade of one 
of the oars got fast in the water and wouldn’t come out 
again (so Alice explained it afterwards), and the conse¬ 
quence was that the handle of it caught her under the 
chin, and, in spite of a series of little shrieks of “Oh, oh, 



WOOL AND WATER 


189 



oh!” from poor Alice, it swept her straight off the seat, 
and down among the heap of rushes. 

However, she wasn’t a bit hurt, and was soon up again: 
the Sheep went on with her knitting all the while, just as 
if nothing had happened. “That was a nice crab you 
caught!” she remarked, as Alice got back into her place, 
very much relieved to find herself still in the boat. 

“Was it! I didn’t see it,” said Alice, peeping cautiously 
over the side of the boat into the dark water. “I wish it 
hadn’t let go—I should so like a little crab to take home 































190 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

with me!” But the Sheep only laughed scornfully, and 
went on with her knitting. 

"Are there many crabs here?” said Alice. 

“Crabs, and all sorts of things,” said the Sheep: “plenty 
of choice, only make up your mind. Now, what do you 
want to buy?” 

“To buy!” Alice echoed in a tone that was half aston¬ 
ished and half frightened—for the oars, and the boat, and 
the river, had vanished all in a moment, and she was 
back again in the little dark shop. 

“I should like to buy an egg, please,” she said timidly. 
“How do you sell them?” 

“Fivepence farthing for one—twopence for two,” the 
Sheep replied. 

“Then two are cheaper than one?” Alice said in a sur¬ 
prised tone, taking out her purse. 

“Only you must eat them both, if you buy two,” said 
the Sheep. 

“Then I’ll have one, please,” said Alice, as she put the 
money down on the counter. For she thought to herself, 
“They mightn’t be at all nice, you know.” 

The Sheep took the money, and put it away in a Fox: 
then she said “I never put things into people’s hands— 
that would never do—you must get it for yourself.” And 
so saying, she went off to the other end of the shop, and 
set the egg upright on a shelf. 

“I wonder why it wouldn’t do?” thought Alice, as she 
groped her way among the tables and chairs, for the 
shop was very dark towards the end. “The egg seems to 
get further away the more I walk towards it. Let me see, 
is this a chair? Why, it's got branches, I declare! How 
very odd to find trees growing here! And actually here’s 
a little brook! Well, this is the very queerest shop I ever 
saw!” 



HUMPTY DUMPTY 


igi 

So she went on, wondering more and more at every 
step, as everything turned into a tree the moment she 
came up to it, and she quite expected the egg to do the 
same. 


Chapter VI 
Humpty Dumpty 

However, the egg only got larger and larger, and more 
and more human: when she had come within a few yards 
of it, she saw that it had eyes and a nose and mouth; and, 
when she had come close to it, she saw clearly that it was 
HUMPTY DUMPTY himself. “It ca’n't be anybody 
else!” she said to herself. “I'm as certain of it, as if his 
name were written all over his face!” 

It might have been written a hundred times, easily, on 
that enormous face. Humpty Dumpty was sitting, with 
his legs crossed like a Turk, on the top of a high wall— 
such a narrow one that Alice quite wondered how he 
could keep his balance—and, as his eyes were steadily 
fixed in the opposite direction, and he didn't take the 
least notice of her, she thought he must be a stuffed 
figure, after all. 

“And how exactly like an egg he is!” she said aloud, 
standing with her hands ready to catch him, for she was 
every moment expecting him to fall. 

“It’s very provoking”, Humpty Dumpty said after a 
long silence, looking away from Alice as he spoke, “to be 
called an egg— very!” 

“I said you looked like an egg, Sir,” Alice gently ex¬ 
plained. “And some eggs are very pretty, you know,” she 
added, hoping to turn her remark into a sort of compli¬ 
ment. 

"Some people”, said Humpty Dumpty, looking away 
from her as usual, “have no more sense than a baby!” 



192 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

Alice didn’t know what to say to this: it wasn't at all 
like conversation, she thought, as he never said anything 
to her, in fact, his last remark was evidently addressed to 
a tree—so she stood and softly repeated to herself: 

“Humpty Dumpiy sat on a wall: 

Humpty Dumpiy had a great fall. 

All the King’s horses and all the King’s men 
Couldn’t put Humpty Dumpiy in his place again. 

"That last line is much too long for the poetry,” she 
added, almost out loud, forgetting that Humpty Dumpty 
would hear her. 

"Don’t stand chattering to yourself like that,” Humpty 
Dumpty said, looking at her for the first time, "but tell 
me your name and your business.” 

"My name is Alice, but-” 

"It’s a stupid name enough!” Humpty Dumpty inter¬ 
rupted impatiently. "What does it mean?” 

“Must a name mean something?” Alice asked doubt¬ 
fully. 

"Of course it must,” Humpty Dumpty said with a short 
laugh: “my name means the shape I am—and a good 
handsome shape it is, too. With a name like yours, you 
might be any shape, almost.” 

"Why do you sit out here all alone?” said Alice, not 
wishing to begin an argument. 

"Why, because there’s nobody with me!” cried Humpty 
Dumpty. "Did you think I didn’t know the answer to 
that ? Ask another.” 

"Don’t you think you’d be safer down on the ground?” 
Alice went on, not with any idea of making another riddle, 
but simply in her good-natured anxiety for the queer 
creature. "That wall is so very narrow!” 

"What tremendously easy riddles you ask!” Humpty 
Dumpty growled out. "Of course I don’t think so! Why, 
if ever I did fall off—which there’s no chance of—but if 

I did-” Here he pursed up his lips, and looked so 

solemn and grand that Alice could hardly help laughing. 



HUMPTY DUMPTY 


193 

“If 1 did fall,” he went on, “the King has promised me — 
ah, you may turn pale, if you like! You didn’t think I was 
going to say that, did you? The King has promised me — 

with his very own mouth —to—to-” 

“To send all his horses and all his men,” Alice inter¬ 
rupted, rather unwisely. 

“Now I declare that’s too bad!” Humpty Dumpty 
cried, breaking into a sudden passion. “You’ve been list¬ 
ening at doors—and behind trees—and down chimneys— 
or you couldn’t have known it!” 


.Klirtsssa 


SgMi \ 


iiiiHS 


m} 

M 

I \m 


“I haven’t indeed!” Alice 
said very gently. “It's in a 
book.” 

“Ah, well! They may write 
such things in a book, ’ ’ Hump¬ 
ty Dumpty said in a calmer 
tone. “That’s what you call 
a History of England, that is. 
Now, take a good look at me! 
I’m one that has spoken to a 
King, I am: mayhap you'll 
never see such another: and, 















194 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

to show you I’m not proud, you may shake hands with 
me!” And he grinned almost from ear to ear, as he leant 
forwards (and as nearly as possible fell off the wall in 
doing so) and offered Alice his hand. She watched him 
a little anxiously as she took it. "If he smiled much more 
the ends of his mouth might meet behind,” she thought: 
"And then I don’t know what would happen to his head! 
I'm afraid it would come off!” 

“Yes, all his horses and all his men,” Humpty Dumpty 
went on. “They’d pick me up again in a minute, they 
would! However, this conversation is going on a little too 
fast: let's go back to the last remark but one.” 

“I’m afraid I ca’n’t quite remember it,” Alice said, very 
politely. 

“In that case we start afresh,” said Humpty Dumpty, 

“and it’s my turn to choose a subject-” (“He talks 

about it just as if it was a game!” thought Alice.) “So 
here’s a question for you. How old did you say you were?” 

Alice made a short calculation, and said “Seven years 
and six months.” 

"Wrong!” Humpty Dumpty exclaimed triumphantly. 
“You never said a word like it!” 

“I thought you meant ‘How old are you?’ ” Alice ex¬ 
plained. 

“If I’d meant that, I’d have said it,” said Humpty 
Dumpty. 

Alice didn’t want to begin another argument, so she 
said nothing. 

“Seven years and six months!” Humpty Dumpty re¬ 
peated thoughtfully.. “An uncomfortable sort of age. Now 
if you’d asked my advice, I’d have said ‘Leave off at 
seven’-but it’s too late now.” 

“I never ask advice about growing,” Alice said indig¬ 
nantly. 

“Too proud?” the other enquired. 

Alice felt even more indignant at this suggestion. “I 
mean”, she said, “that one ca’n’t help growing older.” 

“One ca’n’t, perhaps,” said Humpty Dumpty; “but two 



HUMPTY DUMPTY I 95 

can. With proper assistance, you might have left off at 
seven.” 

"What a beautiful belt you’ve got on!” Alice suddenly 
remarked. (They had had quite enough of the subject of 
age, she thought: and, if they really were to take turns in 
choosing subjects, it was her turn now.) “At least,” she 
corrected herself on second thoughts, “a beautiful cravat, 
I should have said—no, a belt, I mean—I beg your par¬ 
don!” she added in dismay, for Humpty Dumpty looked 
thoroughly offended, and she began to wish she hadn’t 
chosen that subject. “If only I knew”, she thought to her¬ 
self, “which was neck and which was waist!” 

Evidently Humpty Dumpty was very angry, though he 
said nothing for a minute or two. When he did speak 
again, it was in a deep growl. 

“It is a— most — -provoking —thing”, he said at last, 
“when a person doesn’t know a cravat from a belt!” 

“I know it’s very ignorant of me,” Alice said, in so 
humble a tone that Humpty Dumpty relented. 

“It’s a cravat, child, and a beautiful one, as you say. 
It’s a present from the White King and Queen. There now!” 

“Is it really?” said Alice, quite pleased to find that she 
had chosen a good subject after all. 

“They gave it me,” Humpty Dumpty continued 
thoughtfully as he crossed one knee over the other and 
clasped his hands round it, “they gave it me—for an un¬ 
birthday present.” 

“I beg your pardon?” Alice said with a puzzled air. 

“I’m not offended,” said Humpty Dumpty. 

"I mean, what is an un-birthday present?” 

“A present given when it isn’t your birthday, of 
course.” 

Alice considered a little. “I like birthday presents 
best,” she said at last. 

“You don’t know what you’re talking about!” cried 
Humpty Dumpty. “How many days are there in a year?” 

“Three hundred and sixty-five,” said Alice. 

“And how many birthdays have you?” 



196 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

“One.” 

“And if you take one from three hundred and sixty-five 
what remains?” 

“Three hundred and sixty-four, of course.” 

Humpty Dumpty looked doubtful. “I’d rather see that 
done on paper,” he said. 

Alice couldn’t help smiling as she took out her memor¬ 
andum book, and worked the sum for him: 

365 

1 


364 


Humpty Dumpty took the book and looked at it care¬ 
fully. “That seems to be done right-” he began. 

“You’re holding it upside down!” Alice interrupted. 

“To be sure I was!” Humpty Dumpty said gaily as she 
turned it round for him. “I thought it looked a little queer. 
As I was saying, that seems to be done right—though I 
haven’t time to look it over thoroughly just now—and 
that shows that there are three hundred and sixty-four 
days when you might get un-birthday presents-” 

“Certainly,” said Alice. 

“And only one for birthday presents, you know. There’s 
glory for you!” 

“I don’t know what you mean by ‘glory’,” Alice said. 

Humpty Dumpty smiled contemptuously. “Of course 
you don’t—till I tell you. I meant ‘there’s a nice knock¬ 
down argument for you!’ ” 

“But ‘glory’ doesn’t mean ‘a nice knock-down argu¬ 
ment’, ” Alice objected. 

“When I use a word”, Humpty Dumpty said, in rather 
a scornful tone, “it means just what I choose it to mean— 
neither mdre nor less.” 

“The question is”, said Alice, “whether you can make 
words mean so many different things.” 

“The question is”, said Humpty Dumpty, “which is to 
be master-that’s all.” 



HUMPTY DUMPTY I97 

Alice was too much puzzled to say anything; so after 
a minute Humpty Dumpty began again. “They’ve a tem¬ 
per, some of them—particularly verbs: they’re the proud¬ 
est—adjectives you can do anything with, but not verbs— 
however, I can manage the whole lot of them! Impenetra¬ 
bility! That’s what I say!” 

“Would you tell me please,” said Alice, “what that 
means?” 

“Now you talk like a reasonable child,” said Humpty 
Dumpty, looking very much pleased. “I meant by ‘im¬ 
penetrability’ that we’ve had enough of that subject, and 
it would be just as well if you’d mention what you mean 
to do next, as I suppose you don't mean to stop here all 
the rest of your life.” 

“That’s a great deal to make one word mean,” Alice 
said in a thoughtful tone. 

“When I make a word do a lot of work like that,” said 
Humpty Dumpty, “I always pay it extra.” 

"Oh!” said Alice. She was too much puzzled to make 
any other remark. 

“Ah, you should see ’em come round me of a Saturday 
night”, Humpty Dumpty went on, wagging his head 
gravely from side to side, “for to get their wages, you 
know.” 

(Alice didn’t venture to ask what he paid them with; 
and so you see I ca’n’t tellyow.) 

“You seem very clever at explaining words, Sir,” said 
Alice. “Would you kindly tell me the meaning of the 
poem called ‘Jabberwocky’?” 

“Let’s hear it,” said Humpty Dumpty. “I can explain 
all the poems that ever were invented—and a good many 
that haven’t been invented just yet.” 

This sounded very hopeful, so Alice repeated the first 
verse: 

“ ’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves 
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe: 

A ll mimsy were the borogoves, 

And the mome raths outgrabe.” 



198 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 



"That's enough to begin with,” Humpty Dumpty in¬ 
terrupted: "there are plenty of hard words there. ‘Brillig’ 
means four o’clock in the afternoon—the time when you 
begin broiling things for dinner.” 

"That’ll do very well,” said Alice: “and ‘slithy’l” 

"Well, ‘slithy’ means ‘lithe and slimy’. ‘Lithe’ is the 
same as ‘active’. You see it’s like a portmanteau—there 
are two meanings packed up into one word.” 

"I see it now,” Alice remarked thoughtfully: “and 
what are ‘ toves’V ’ 


























HUMPTY DUMPTY 


199 

"Well, ‘toves’ are something like badgers—they’re 
something like lizards—and they’re something like cork¬ 
screws.” 

“They must be very curious-looking creatures.” 

"They are that,” said Humpty Dumpty; "also they 
make their nests under sun-dials—also they live on 
cheese.” 

"And what’s to ‘gyre’ and to ‘ gimble’T' 

"To ‘gyre’ is to go round and round like a gyroscope. 
To ‘gimble’ is to make holes like a gimlet.” 

"And ‘the wabe’ is the grass-plot round a sun-dial, I 
suppose?” said Alice, surprised at her own ingenuity. 

"Of course it is. It’s called ‘wabe’ you know, because it 
goes a long way before it, and a long way behind it-” 

“And a long way beyond it on each side,” Alice added. 

“Exactly so. Well then, ‘mimsy’ is 'flimsy and miser¬ 
able’ (there’s another portmanteau for you). And a ‘ boro - 
gove’ is a thin shabby-looking bird with its feathers stick¬ 
ing out all round—something like a live mop.” 

"And then ‘mome raths’l” said Alice. "I’m afraid I’m 
giving you a great deal of trouble.” 

"Well, a ‘rath’ is a sort of green pig: but ‘mome’ I’m 
not certain about. I think it’s short for ‘from home’— 
meaning that they’d lost their way, you know.” 

"And what does ‘outgrabe mean?” 

"Well, ‘ontgribing’ is something between bellowing and 
whistling, with a kind of sneeze in the middle: however, 
you’ll hear it done, maybe—down in the wood yonder— 
and, when you’ve once heard it, you’ll be quite content. 
Who’s been repeating all that hard stuff to you?” 

"I read it in a book,” said Alice. "But I had some poetry 
repeated to me much easier than that, by—Tweedledee, I 
think it was.” 

"As to poetry, you know,” said Humpty Dumpty, 
stretching out one of his great hands, “I can repeat poetry 
as well as other folk, if it comes to that-” 

“Oh, it needn't come to that!” Alice hastily said, 
hoping to keep him from beginning. 



200 


THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


"The piece I’m going to repeat”, he went on without 
noticing her remark, "was written entirely for your 
amusement.” 

Alice felt that in that case she really ought to listen to 
it; so she sat down, and said "Thank you” rather sadly, 

“In winter, when the fields are white, 

I sing this song for your delight - 

only I don’t sing it,” he added, as an explanation. 

"I see you don’t,” said Alice. 

"If you can see whether I’m singing or not, you’ve 
sharper eyes than most,” Humpty Dumpty remarked 
severely. Alice was silent. 

“In spring, when woods are getting green, 

I’ll try and tell you what I mean:"’ 

"Thank you very much,” said Alice. 

“In summer, when the days are long, 

Perhaps you’ll understand the song: 

In autumn, when the leaves are brown. 

Take pen and ink, and write it down.” 

"I will, if I can remember it so long,” said Alice. 

“You needn’t go on making remarks like that,” 
Humpty Dumpty said: "they’re not sensible, and they 
put me out.” 

“I sent a message to the fish: 

I told them ‘This is what I wish.’ 

The little fishes of the sea, 

They sent an answer back to me. 

The little fishes’ answer was 
' We cannot do it. Sir, because -’ ” 

"I’m afraid I don't quite understand,” said Alice. 

"It gets easier further on,” Humpty Dumpty replied. 



HUMPTY DUMPTY 


201 


“I sent to them again to say 
‘It will be better to obey’. 

The fishes answered, with a grin, 
‘Why, what a temper you are in!’ 



I told them once, I told them twice: 

They would not listen to advice. 

I took a kettle large and new, 

Fit for the deed I had to do. 

My heart went hop, my heart went thump: 
I filled the kettle at the pump. 

Then some one came to me and said 
‘The little fishes are in bed.’ 

I said to him, I said it plain, 

‘Thenyou must wake them up again.’ 



202 


THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


I said it very loud and clear: 

I went and shouted in his ear.” 

Humpty Dumpty raised his voice almost to a scream as 
he repeated this verse, and Alice thought, with a shudder, 
“I wouldn't have been the messenger for anythingl” 

‘‘But he was very stiff and proud: 

He said, ‘ You needn’t shout so loud!’ 

A nd he was very proud and stiff: 

He said ‘I’d go and wake them, if -’ 

I took a corkscrew from the shelf: 

I went to wake them up myself. 

And when I found the door was locked, 

I pulled and pushed and kicked and knocked. 

And when I found the door was shut, 

I tried to turn the handle, but -” 

There was a long pause. 

“Is that all?" Alice timidly asked. 

"That's all," said Humpty Dumpty. “Good-bye.” 

This was rather sudden, Alice thought: but, after such a 
very strong hint that she ought to be going, she felt that it 
would hardly be civil to stay. So she got up, and held out 
her hand. “Good-bye, till we meet again!" she said as 
cheerfully as she could. 

“I shouldn't know you again if we did meet,” Humpty 
Dumpty replied in a discontented tone, giving her one of 
his fingers to shake: “you’re so exactly like other people.” 

“The face is what one goes by, generally,” Alice re¬ 
marked in a thoughtful tone. 

“That’s just what I complain of,” said Humpty 
Dumpty. “Your face is the same as everybody has—the 

two eyes, so-” (marking their places in the air with 

his thumb) “nose in the middle, mouth under. It’s always 
the same. Now if you had the two eyes on the same side 
of the nose, for instance—or the mouth at the top—that 
would be some help.” 



THE LION AND THE UNICORN 203 

“It wouldn’t look nice,” Alice objected. But Humpty 
Dumpty only shut his -eyes, and said “Wait till you’ve 
tried.” 

Alice waited a minute to see if he would speak again, 
but, as he never opened his eyes or took any further no¬ 
tice of her, she said “Good-bye!” once more, and, getting 
no answer to this, she quietly walked away; but she 
couldn’t help saying to herself, as she went, “of all the un¬ 
satisfactory-” (she repeated this aloud, as it was a 

great comfort to have such a long word to say) “of all the 

unsatisfactory people I ever met-” She never finished 

the sentence, for at this moment a heavy crash shook the 
forest from end to end. 


Chapter VII 

The Lion and the Unicorn 

The next moment soldiers came running through the 
wood, at first in twos and threes, then ten or twenty to¬ 
gether, and at last in such crowds that they seemed to fill 
the whole forest. Alice got behind a tree, for fear of being 
run over, and watched them go by. , 

She thought that in all her life she had never seen 
soldiers so uncertain on their feet: they were always trip¬ 
ping over something or other, and whenever one went 
down, several more always fell over him, so that the 
ground was soon covered with little heaps of men. 

Then came the horses. Having four feet, these managed 
rather better than the foot-soldiers; but even they 
stumbled now and then; and it seemed to be a regular rule 
that, whenever a horse stumbled, the rider fell off in¬ 
stantly. The confusion got worse every moment, and 
Alice was very glad to get out of the wood into an open 
place, where she found the White King seated on the 
ground, busily writing in his memorandum-book. 



“I’ve sent them all!” the King cried in a tone of delight, 
on seeing Alice. “Did you happen to meet any soldiers, 
my dear, as you came through the wood?” 

“Yes, .1 did,” said Alice: “several thousand, I should 
think.” 

“Four thousand two hundred and seven, that’s the 
exact number,” the King said, referring to his book. “I 
couldn’t send all the horses, you know, because two of 
them are wanted in the game. And I haven’t sent the two 





THE LION AND THE UNICORN 205 

Messengers, either. They’re both gone to the town. Just 
look along the road, and tell me if you can see either of 
them.” 

“I see nobody on the road,” said Alice. 

“I only wish / had such eyes,” the King remarked in a 
fretful tone. "To be able to see Nobody! And at that dis¬ 
tance too! Why, it’s as much as I can do to see real people, 
by this light!” 

All this was lost on Alice, who was still looking intently 
along the road, shading her eyes with one hand. “I see 
somebody now!” she exclaimed at last. “But he’s coming 
very slowly—and what curious attitudes he goes into!” 
(For the Messenger kept skipping up and down, and 
wriggling like an eel, as he came along, with his great 
hands spread out like fans on each side.) 

“Not at all,” said the King. ‘‘He’s an Anglo-Saxon 
Messenger—and those are Anglo-Saxon attitudes. He 
only does them when he’s happy. His name is Haigha.” 
(He pronounced it so as to rhyme with ‘mayor’.) 

‘‘I love my love with an H,” Alice couldn’t help begin¬ 
ning, ‘‘because he is Happy. I hate him with an H, be¬ 
cause he is Hideous. I fed him with—with—with Ham- 
sandwiches and Hay. His name is Haigha, and he lives 


“He lives on the Hill,” the King remarked simply, 
without the least idea that he was joining in the game, 
while Alice was still hesitating for the name of a town be¬ 
ginning with H. ‘‘The other Messenger’s called Hatta. I 
must have two, you know—to come and go. One to come, 
and one to go.” 

‘‘I beg your pardon?” said Alice. 

‘‘It isn’t respectable to beg,” said the King. 

“I only meant that I didn’t understand,” said Alice. 
‘‘Why one to come and one to go?” 

“Don’t I tell you?” the King repeated impatiently. “I 
must have two —to fetch and carry. One to fetch, and one 
to carry.” 

At this moment the Messenger arrived: he was far too 



206 through the looking-glass 

much out of breath to say a word, and could only wave 
his hands about, and make the most fearful faces at the 
poor King. 

“This young lady loves you with an H,” the King said, 
introducing Alice in the hope of turning off the Messen¬ 
ger’s attention from himself—but it was of no use—the 
Anglo-Saxon attitudes only got more extraordinary every 
moment, while the great eyes rolled wildly from side to 
side. 

"You alarm me!’’ said the King. “I feel faint—Give me 
a ham-sandwich! ’ ’ 

On which the Messenger, to Alice’s great amusement, 
opened a bag that hung round his neck, and handed a 
sandwich to the King, who devoured it greedily. 

“Another sandwich!” said the King. 

“There’s nothing but hay left now,” the Messenger 
said, peeping into the bag. 







THE LION AND THE UNICORN 20 J 

“Hay, then,” the King murmured in a faint whisper. 

Alice was glad to see that it revived him a good deal. 
“There’s nothing like eating hay when you’re faint,” he 
remarked to her, as he munched away. 

“I should think throwing cold water over you would be 
better,” Alice suggested: “—or some sal-volatile.” 

“I didn’t say there was nothing better,” the King re¬ 
plied. “I said there was nothing like it.” Which Alice did 
not venture to deny. 

“Who did you pass on the road?” the King went on, 
holding out his hand to the Messenger for some hay. 

“Nobody,” said the Messenger. 

“Quite right,” said the King: “this young lady saw him 
too. So of course Nobody walks slower than you.” 

“I do my best,” the Messenger said in a sullen tone. 
“I’m sure nobody walks much faster than I do!” 

“He ca’n’t do that,” said the King, “or else he’d have 
been here first. However, now you’ve got your breath, 
you may tell us what’s happened in the town.” 

“I’ll whisper it,” said the Messenger, putting his hands 
to his mouth in the shape of a trumpet and stooping so as 
to get close to the King’s ear. Alice was sorry for this, as 
she wanted to hear the news too. However, instead of 
whispering, he simply shouted, at the top of his voice, 
“They’re at it again!” 

“Do you call that a whisper?” cried the poor King, 
jumping up and shaking himself. “If you do such a thing 
again I’ll have you buttered! It went through and through 
my head like an earthquake!” 

“It would have to be a very tiny earthquake!” thought 
Alice. “Who are at it again?” she ventured to ask. 

“Why the Lion and the Unicorn, of course,” said the 
King. 

“Fighting for the crown?” 

“Yes, to be sure,” said the King: “and the best of the 
joke is, that it’s my crown all the while! Let’s run and see 
them.” And they trotted oh, Alice repeating to herself, as 
she ran, the words of the old song: 



208 


THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


“The Lion and the Unicorn were fighting for the crown: 

The Lion heat the Unicorn all round the town. 

Some gave them white bread, some gave them brown: 

Some gave them plum-cake and drummed them out of town." 

“Does-the one-that wins-get the crown?” 

she asked, as well as she could, for the run was putting 
her quite out of breath. 

“Dear me, no!” said the King. “What an idea!” 

“Would you-be good enough-” Alice panted 

out, after running a little further, “to stop a minute—just 
to get—one’s breath again?” 

“I’m good enough,” the King said, “only I’m not strong 
enough. You see, a minute goes by so fearfully quick. 
You might as well try to stop a Bandersnatch!” 

Alice had no more breath for talking; so they trotted on 
in silence, till they came into sight of a great crowd, in the 
middle of which the Lion and Unicorn were fighting. 
They were in such a cloud of dust, that at first Alice could 
not make out which was which; but she soon managed to 
distinguish the Unicorn by his horn. 

They placed themselves close to where Hatta, the other 
Messenger, was standing watching the fight, with a cup 
of tea in one hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the 
other. 

“He’s only just out of prison, and he hadn’t finished his 
tea when he was sent in,” Haigha whispered to Alice: 
“and they only give them oyster-shells in there—so you 
see he’s very hungry and thirsty. How are you, dear 
child?” he went on, putting his arm affectionately round 
Hatta’s neck. 

Hatta looked round and nodded, and went on with his 
bread-and-butter. 

“Were you happy in prison, dear child?” said Haigha. 

Hatta looked round once more, and this time a tear or 
two trickled down his cheek; but not a word would he say. 

“Speak, ca’n’t you!” Haigha cried impatiently. But 
Hatta only munched away, and drank some more tea. 



THE LION AND THE UNICORN 20g 

“Speak, wo’n’t you!” cried the King. “How are they 
getting on with the fight?” 

Hatta made a desperate effort, and swallowed a large 
piece of bread-and-butter. “They’re getting on very 
well,” he said in a choking voice: “each of them has been 
down about eighty-seven times.” 

“Then I suppose they’ll soon bring the white bread and 
the brown?” Alice ventured to remark. 



“It’s waiting for ’em now,” said Hatta; “this is a bit of 
it as I’m eating.’’ 

There was a pause in the fight just then, and the Lion 
and the Unicorn sat down, panting, while the King called 
out “Ten minutes allowed for refreshments!” Haigha and 
Hatta set to work at once, carrying round trays of white 
and brown bread. Alice took a piece to taste, but it was 
very dry. 

“I don’t think they’ll fight any more to-day,” the King 
said to Hatta: “go and order the drums to begin.” And 
Hatta went bounding away like a grasshopper. 


H 


L.C. 









210 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

For a minute or two Alice stood silent, watching him. 
Suddenly she brightened up. “Look, look!” she cried, 
pointing eagerly. “There’s the White Queen running 
across the country! She came flying out of the wood over 
yonder- How fast those Queens can run!” 

“There’s some enemy after her, no doubt,” the King 
said, without even looking round. “That wood's full of 
them.” 

“But aren’t you going to run and help her?” Alice 
asked, very much surprised at his taking it so quietly. 

“No use, no use!” said the King. “She runs so fearfully 
quick. You might as well try to catch a Bandersnatch! 

But I’ll make a memorandum about her, if you like- 

She’s a dear good creature,” he repeated softly to him¬ 
self, as he opened his memorandum-book. “Do you spell 
'creature’ with a double ‘e’?” 

At this moment the Unicorn sauntered by them, with 
his hands in his pockets. “I had the best of it this time?” 
he said to the King, just glancing at him as he passed. 

“A little—a little,” the King replied, rather nervously. 
“You shouldn’t have run him through with your horn, 
you know.” 

“It didn’t hurt him,” the Unicorn said carelessly, and 
he was going on, when his eye happened to fall upon 
Alice: he turned round instantly, and stood for some time 
looking at her with an air of the deepest disgust. 

“What—is—this?” he said at last. 

“This is a child!” Haigha replied eagerly, coming in 
front of Alice to introduce her, and spreading out both his 
hands towards her in an Anglo-Saxon attitude. “We 
only found it to-day. It’s as large as life, and twice as 
natural!” 

“I always thought they were fabulous monsters!” said 
the Unicorn. “Is it alive?” 

“It can talk,” said Haigha solemnly. 

The Unicorn looked dreamily at Alice, and said “Talk, 
child.” 

Alice could not help her lips curling up into a smile as 



THE LION AND THE UNICORN 


211 


she began: “Do you know, I always thought Unicorns 
were fabulous monsters, too? I never saw one alive be¬ 
fore!” 

“Well, now that we have seen each other,” said the Uni¬ 
corn, “if you’ll believe in me, I’ll believe in you. Is that a 
bargain?” 

“Yes, if you like,” said Alice. 



“Come, fetch out the plum-cake, old man!” the Uni¬ 
corn went on, turning from her to the King. “None of 
your brown bread for me!” 

“Certainly—certainly!” the King muttered, and beck¬ 
oned to Haigha. “Open the bag!” he whispered. “Quick! 
Not that one—that’s full of hay!” 

Haigha took a large cake out of the bag, and gave it to 
Alice to hold, while he got out a dish and carving-knife. 
How they all came out of it Alice couldn’t guess. It was 
just like a conjuring trick, she thought. 

The Lion had joined them while this was going on: he 
looked very tired and sleepy, and his eyes were half shut. 










212 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

“What’s this!” he said, blinking lazily at Alice, and speak¬ 
ing in a deep hollow tone that sounded like the tolling of 
a great bell. 

“Ah, what is it, now?” the Unicorn cried eagerly. 
“You’ll never guess! I couldn’t.” 

The Lion looked at Alice wearily. “Are you animal— 
or vegetable—or mineral?” he said, yawning at every 
other word. 

"It’s a fabulous monster!” the Unicorn cried out, be¬ 
fore Alice could reply. 

"Then hand round the plum-cake, Monster,” the Lion 
said, lying down and putting his chin on his paws. “And 
sit down, both of you,” (to the King and the Unicorn): 
“fair play with the cake, you know!” 

The King was evidently very uncomfortable at having 
to sit down between the two great creatures; but there 
was no other place for him. 

“What a fight we might have for the crown, now\” the 
Unicorn said, looking slyly up at the crown, which the 
poor King was nearly shaking off his head, he trembled 
so much. 

“I should win easy,” said the Lion. 

“I’m not so sure of that,” said the Unicorn. 

“Why, I beat you all round the town, you chicken!” 
the Lion replied angrily, half getting up as he spoke. 

Here the King interrupted, to prevent the quarrel go¬ 
ing on: he was very nervous, and his voice quite quivered. 
“All round the town?” he said. “That’s a good long way. 
Did you go by the old bridge, or the market-place? You 
get the best view by the old bridge.” 

“I’m sure I don’t know,” the Lion growled out as he 
lay down again. “There was too much dust to see any¬ 
thing. What a time the Monster is, cutting up that 
cake!” 

Alice had seated herself on the bank of a little brook, 
with the great dish on her knees, and was sawing away 
diligently with the knife. “It’s very provoking!” she said, 
in reply to the Lion (she was getting quite used to being 



THE LION AND THE UNICORN 213 

called 'the Monster'). “I've cut several slices already, but 
they always join on again!” 

“You don’t know how to manage Looking-glass cakes,” 
the Unicorn remarked. “Hand it round first, and cut it 
afterwards.” 

This sounded nonsense, but Alice very obediently got 
up, and carried the dish round, and the cake divided itself 



into three pieces as she did so. “Now cut it up,” said 
the Lion, as she returned to her place with the empty 
dish. 

“I say, this isn’t fair!” cried the Unicom, as Alice sat 
with the knife in her hand, very much puzzled how to 
begin. “The Monster has given the Lion twice as much 
as me!” 




214 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

“She’s kept none for herself, anyhow,” said the Lion. 
“Do you like plum-cake, Monster?” 

But before Alice could answer him, the drums began. 
Where the noise came from, she couldn’t make out: 
the air seemed full of it, and it rang through and through 
her head till she felt quite deafened. She started to her 
feet and sprang across the little brook in her terror, and 
had just time to see the Lion and the Unicorn rise to their 

$ ' s(t s|c 4: 

* * * * 

^ 

feet, with angry looks at being interrupted in their feast, 
before she dropped to her knees, and put her hands over 
her ears, vainly trying to shut out the dreadful uproar. 

"If that doesn’t ‘drum them out of town’,” she thought 
to herself, “nothing ever will!” 


Chapter VIII 
“It’s My Own Invention” 

After a while the noise seemed gradually to die away, 
till all was dead silence, and Alice lifted "up her head in 
some alarm. There was no one to be seen, and her first 
thought was that she must have been dreaming about the 
Lion and the Unicorn and those queer Anglo-Saxon Mes¬ 
sengers. However, there was the great dish still lying at 
her feet, on which she had tried to cut the plum-cake, 
“So I wasn’t dreaming, after all,” she said to herself, “un¬ 
less—unless we’re all part of the same dream. Only I do 
hope it’s my dream, and not the Red King’s! I don’t like 
belonging to another person’s dream,” she went on in a 
rather complaining tone: “I’ve a great mind to go and 
wake him, and see what happens! ” 

At this moment her thoughts were interrupted by a 



"it’s my own invention” 215 

loud shouting of “Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!” and a Knight, 
dressed in crimson armour, came galloping down upon 
her, brandishing a great club. Just as he reached her, the 
horse stopped suddenly: “You’re my prisoner!” the 
Knight cried, as he tumbled off his horse. 



Startled as she was, Alice was more frightened for him 
than for herself at the moment, and watched him with 
some anxiety as he mounted again. As soon as he was 
comfortably in the saddle, he began once more “You’re 

my-” but here another voice broke in “Ahoy! Ahoy! 

Check!” and Alice looked round in some surprise for the 
new enemy. 

This time it was a White Knight. He drew up at Alice’s 
side, and tumbled off his horse just as the Red Knight had 





216 through the looking-glass 

done: then he got on again, and the two Knights sat and 
looked at each other for some time without speaking. 
Alice looked from one to the other in some bewilder¬ 
ment. 

“She’s my prisoner, you know!” the Red Knight said 
at last. 

“Yes, but then I came and rescued her!” the White 
Knight replied. „ 

“Well, we must fight for her, then,” said the Red 
Knight, as he took up his helmet (which hung from the 
saddle, and was something the shape of a horse’s head) 
and put it on. 

“You will observe the Rules of Battle, of course?” the 
White Knight remarked, putting on his helmet too. 

“I always do,” said the Red Knight, and they began 
banging away at each other with such fury that Alice 
got behind a tree to be out of the way of the blows. 

“I wonder, now, what the Rules of Battle are,” she said 
to herself, as she watched the fight, timidly peeping out 
from her hiding-place. “One Rule seems to be, that if one 
Knight hits the other, he knocks him off his horse; and, 
if he misses, he tumbles off himself—and another Rule 
seems to be that they hold their clubs with their arms, as 

if they were Punch and Judy-What a noise they make 

when they tumble! Just like a whole set of fire-irons fall¬ 
ing into the fender! And how quiet the horses are! They 
let them get on and off them just as if they were tables!” 

Another Rule of Battle, that Alice had not noticed, 
seemed to be that they always fell on their heads; and the 
battle ended with their both falling off in this way, side by 
side. When they got up again, they shook hands, and then 
the Red Knight mounted and galloped off. 

“It was a glorious victory, wasn’t it?” said the White 
Knight, as he came up panting. 

"I don’t know,” Alice said doubtfully. “I don’t want to 
be anybody’s prisoner. I want to be a Queen.” 

“So you will, when you’ve crossed the next brook,” 
said the White Knight. “I’ll see you safe to the end of the 



"it’s my own invention" 217 

wood—and then I must go back, you know. That’s the 
end of my move.” 

“Thank you very much,” said Alice. “May I help you 
off with your helmet?” It was evidently more than he 
could manage by himself: however she managed to shake 
him out of it at last. 

“Now one can breathe more easily,” said the Knight, 
putting back his shaggy hair with both hands, and turn¬ 
ing his gentle face and large mild eyes to Alice. She 
thought she had never seen such a strange-looking soldier 
in all her life. 

He was dressed in tin armour, which seemed to fit him 
very badly, and he had a queer-shaped little deal box 
fastened across his shoulders, upside-down, and with the 
lid hanging open. Alice looked at it with great curiosity. 

“I see you’re admiring my little box,” the Knight said 
in a friendly tone. “It’s my own invention—to keep 
clothes and sandwiches in. You see I carry it upside-down, 
so that the rain ca’n’t get in.” 

“But the things can get out,” Alice gently remarked. 
“Do you know the lid’s open?” 

“I didn’t know it,” the Knight said, a shade of vexa¬ 
tion passing over his face. “Then all the things must have 
fallen out! And the box is no use without’ them.” He un¬ 
fastened it as he spoke, and was just going to throw it 
into the bushes, when a sudden thought seemed to strike 
him, and he hung it carefully on a tree. “Can you guess 
why I did that?” he said to Alice. 

Alice shook her head. 

“In hopes some bees may make a nest in it—then I 
should get the honey.” 

“But you've got a bee-hive—or something like one— 
fastened to the saddle,” said Alice. 

“Yes, it’s a very good bee-hive,” the Knight said in a 
discontented tone, “one of the best kind. But not a single 
bee has come near it yet. And the other thing is a mouse¬ 
trap. I suppose the mice keep the bees out—or the bees 
keep the mice out, I don’t know which.” 



2l8 


THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


“I was wondering what the mouse-trap was for,” said 
Alice. “It isn’t very likely there would be any mice on 
the horse’s back.” 

“Not very likely, perhaps,” said the Knight; “but, if 
they do come, I don’t choose to have them running all 
about.” 

“You see,” he went on after a pause, “it’s as well to be 
provided for everything. That’s the reason the horse has 
all those anklets round his feet. ” 

“But what are they for?” Alice asked in a tone of great 
curiosity. 

“To guard against the bites of sharks,” the Knight re¬ 
plied. “It’s an invention of my own. And now help me on. 
I’ll go with you to the end of the wood—What’s that 
dish for?” 

“It’s meant for plum-cake,” said Alice. 

“We’d better take it with us,” the Knight said. “It’ll 
come in handy if we find any plum-cake. Help me to get 
it into this bag.” 

This took a long time to manage, though Alice held the 
bag open very carefully, because the knight was so very 
awkward in putting in the dish: the first two or three 
times that he tried he fell in himself instead. “It’s rather a 
tight fit, you see,” he said, as they got it in at last; “there 
are so many candlesticks in the bag.” And he hung it to 
the saddle, which was already loaded with bunches of 
carrots, and fire-irons, and many other things. 

“I hope you’ve got your hair well fastened on?” he 
continued, as they set off. 

“Only in the usual way,” Alice said, smiling. 

“That’s hardly enough,” he said, anxiously. “You see 
the wind is so very strong here. It’s as strong as soup.” 

“Have you invented a plan for keeping the hair from 
being blown off?” Alice enquired. 

“Not yet,” said the Knight. “But I’ve got a plan for 
keeping it trorn falling off.” 

“I should like to hear it, very much.” 

“First you take an upright stick,” said the Knight. 



IT S MY OWN INVENTION” 2ig 

“Then yon make your hair creep up it, like a fruit-tree. 
Now the reason hair falls off is because it hangs down — 
things never fall upwards, you know. It’s a plan of my 
own invention. You may try it if you like.” 

It didn’t sound a comfortable plan, Alice thought, and 
for a few minutes she walked on in silence, puzzling over 



the idea, and every now and then stopping to help the 
poor Knight, who certainly was not a good rider. 

Whenever the horse stopped (which it did very often), 
he fell off in front; and, whenever it went on again 
(which it generally did rather suddenly), he fell off be¬ 
hind. Otherwise he kept on pretty well, except that he 
had a habit of now and then falling off sideways; and, as 
he generally did this on the side on which Alice was 
walking, she soon found that it was the best plan not to 
walk quite close to the horse. 



















220 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

‘Tm afraid you’ve not had much practice in riding,” 
she ventured to say, as she was helping him up from his 
fifth tumble. 

The Knight looked very much surprised, and a little 
offended at the remark. “What makes you say that?” he 
asked, as he scrambled back into the saddle, keeping hold 
of Alice’s hair with one hand, to save himself from falling 
over on the other side. 

“Because people don’t fall off quite so often, when 
they’ve had much practice.” 

“I’ve had plenty of practice,” the Knight said very 
gravely: “plenty of practice!” 

Alice could think of nothing better to say than “In¬ 
deed?” but she said it as heartily as she could. They went 
on a little way in silence after this, the Knight with his 
eyes shut, muttering to himself, and Alice watching anx¬ 
iously for the next tumble. 

“The great art of riding”, the Knight suddenly began 
in a loud voice, waving his right arm as he spoke, “is to 

keep-” Here the sentence ended as suddenly as it had 

begun, as the Knight fell heavily on the top of his head 
exactly in the path where Alice was walking. She was 
quite frightened this time, and said in an anxious tone, as 
she picked him up, "I hope no bones are broken?” 

“None to speak of,” the Knight said, as if he didn’t 
mind breaking two or three of them. “The great art of 
riding, as I was saying, is—to keep your balance prop¬ 
erly. Like this, you know-” 

He let go the bridle, and stretched out both his arms to 
show Alice what he meant, and this time he fell flat on his 
back, right under the horse’s feet. 

“Plenty of practice!” he went on repeating, all the time 
that Alice was getting him on his feet again. “Plenty of 
practice!” 

“It's too ridiculous!” cried Alice, losing all her patience 
this time. “You ought to have a wooden horse on wheels, 
that you ought!” 

“Poes that kind go smoothly?” the Knight asked in a 



"it’s MY OWN INVENTION” 221 

tone of great interest, clasping his arms round the horse’s 
neck as he spoke, just in time to save himself from tum¬ 
bling off again. 

“Much more smoothly than a live horse,” Alice said, 
with a little scream of laughter, in spite of all she could do 
to prevent it. 

“I’ll get one,” the Knight said thoughtfully to himself. 
“One or two—several.” 

There was a short silence after this, and then the Knight 
went on again. "I’m a great hand at inventing things. 
Now, I daresay you noticed, the last time you picked me 
up, that I was looking rather thoughtful?” 

“You were a little grave,” said Alice. 

“Well, just then I was inventing a new way of getting 
over a gate—would you like to hear it?” 

“Very much indeed,” Alice said politely. 

"I'll tell you how I came to think of it,” said the 
Knight. “You see, I said to myself ‘The only difficulty is 
with the feet: the head is high enough already.' Now, first 
I put my head on the top of the gate—then the head’s 
high enough—then I stand on my head—then the feet are 
high enough, you see—then I’m over, you see.” 

“Yes, I suppose you’d be over when-that was done,” 
Alice said thoughtfully: “but don’t you think it would be 
rather hard?” 

“I haven’t tried it yet,” the Knight said, gravely; “so I 
ca’n’t tell for certain—but I’m afraid it would be a little 
hard.” 

He looked so vexed at the idea, that Alice changed the 
subject hastily. “What a curious helmet you’ve got!” she 
said cheerfully. “Is that your invention too?” 

The Knight looked down proudly at his helmet, which 
hung from the saddle. "Yes,” he said; “but I’ve invented 
a better one than that—like a sugar-loaf. When I used to 
wear it, if I fell off the horse, it always touched the 
ground directly. So I had a very little way to fall, you see 
—But there was the danger of falling into it, to be sure. 
That happened to me once—and the worst of it was, be- 



222 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

fore I could get out again, the other White Knight came 
and put it on. He thought it was his own helmet.” 

The Knight looked so solemn about it that Alice did 
not dare to laugh. "I’m afraid you must have hurt him,” 
she said in a trembling voice, "being on the top of his 
head.” 

"I had to kick him, of course,” the Knight said, very 
seriously. "And then he took the helmet off again—but it 
took hours and hours to get me out. I was as fast as—as 
lightning, you know. ’ ’ 

"But that's a different kind of fastness,” Alice objected. 

The Knight shook his head. "It was all kinds of fast¬ 
ness with me, I can assure you!” he said. He raised his 
hands in some excitement as he said this, and instantly 
rolled out of the saddle, and fell headlong into a deep 
ditch. 

Alice ran to the side of the ditch to look for him. She 
was rather startled by the fall, as for some time he had 
kept on very well, and she was afraid that he really was 
hurt this time. However, though she could see nothing 
but the soles of his feet, she was much relieved to hear 
that he was talking on in his usual tone. "All kinds of 






“it’s my own invention” 223 

fastness/’ he repeated: “but it was careless of him to put 
another man’s helmet on—with the man in it, too.” 

“How can you go on talking so quietly, head down¬ 
wards?” Alice asked, as she dragged him out by the feet, 
and laid him in a heap on the bank. 

The Knight looked surprised at the question. “What 
does it matter where my body happens to be?” he said. 
“My mind goes on working all the same. In fact, the more 
head-downwards I am, the more I keep inventing new 
things.” 

“Now the cleverest thing of the sort that I ever did,” 
he went on after a pause, “was inventing a new pudding 
during the meat-course.” 

“In time to have it cooked for the next course?” said 
Alice. “Well, that was quick work, certainly!” 

“Well, not the next course,” the Knight said in a slow 
thoughtful tone: “no, certainly not the next course.” 

“Then it would have to be the next day. I suppose you 
wouldn’t have two pudding-courses in one dinner?” 

“Well, not the next day,” the Knight repeated as before: 
“not the next day. In fact,” he went on, holding his head 
down, and his voice getting lower and lower, “I don't 
believe that pudding ever was cooked! In fact, I don’t be¬ 
lieve that pudding ever will be cooked! And yet it was a 
very clever pudding to invent.” 

“What did you mean it to be made of?” Alice asked, 
hoping to cheer him up, for the poor Knight seemed quite 
low-spirited about it. 

“It began with blotting-paper,” the Knight answered 
with a groan. 

“That wouldn’t be very nice, I’m afraid——” 

“Not very nice alone,” he interrupted, quite eagerly: 
“but you’ve no idea what a difference it makes, mixing it 
with other things—such as gunpowder and sealing-wax. 
And here I must leave you.” They had just come to the 
end of the wood. 

Alice could only look puzzled: she was thinking of 
the pudding. 



224 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

“You are sad,” the Knight said in an anxious tone: “let 
me sing you a song to comfort you.” 

“Is it very long?” Alice asked, for she had heard a good 
deal of poetry that day. 

“It's long,” said the Knight, “but it’s very, very beau¬ 
tiful. Everybody that hears me sing'it—either it brings 
the tears into their eyes, or else-” 

“Or else what?” said Alice, for the Knight had made a 
sudden pause. 

"Or else it doesn’t, you know. The name of the song is 
called ‘Haddocks’ Eyes’.” 

“Oh, that’s the name of the song, is it?” Alice said, try¬ 
ing to feel interested. 

“No, you don’t understand,” the Knight said, looking a 
little vexed. “That’s what the name is called. The name 
really is ‘The Aged Aged Man’.” 

“Then I ought to have said ‘That’s what the song is 
called’?” Alice corrected herself. 

“No, you oughtn’t: that’s quite another thing! The 
song is called ‘Ways and Means’: but that’s only what it's 
called, you know!” 

“Well, what is the song, then?” said Alice, who was by 
this time completely bewildered. 

“I was coming to that,” the Knight said. “The song 
really is ‘A-sitting On A Gate’: and the tune’s my own 
invention.” 

So saying, he stopped his horse and let the reins fall on 
its neck: then, slowly beating time with one hand, and 
with a faint smile lighting up his gentle foolish face, as if 
he enjoyed the music of his song, he began. 

Of all the strange things that Alice saw in her journey 
Through The Looking-Glass, this was the one that she 
always remembered most clearly. Years afterwards she 
could bring the whole scene back again, as if it had 
been only yesterday—the mild blue eyes and kindly smile 
of the Knight—the setting sun gleaming through his hair, 
and shining on his armour in a blaze of light that quite 
dazzled her—the horse quietly moving about, with the 



“it’s my own invention” 225 

reins hanging loose on his neck, cropping the grass at 
her feet—and the black shadows of the forest behind—all 
this she took in like a picture, as, with one hand shading 
her eyes, she leant against a tree, watching the strange 
pair, and listening, in a half-dream, to the melancholy 
music of the song. 

"But the tune isn’t his own invention," she said to her¬ 
self: "it’s ‘I give thee all, I can no more’” She stood and 
listened very attentively, but no tears came into her eyes. 

'‘I’ll tell thee everything I can: 

There’s little to relate. 

I saw an aged aged man, 

A -sitting on a gate. 

'Who are you, aged man?’ I said. 

‘And how is it you live?’ 

And his answer trickled through my head, 

Like water througk-a sieve. 

He ‘said ‘I look for butterflies 
That sleep among the wheat: 

I make them into mutton-pies. 

And sell them in the street. 

I sell them unto men’, he said, 

‘Who sail on stormy seas; 

And that’s the way I get my bread — 

A trifle, if you please.’ 

But I was thinking of apian 
To dye one’s whiskers green, 

And always use so large a fan 
That they could not be seen. 

So, having no reply to give 
To what the old man said, 

I cried ‘Come, tell me how you live!’ 

A nd thumped him on the head. 

His accents mild took up the tale: 

He said ‘I go my ways, 

And when I find a mountain-rill, 

I set it in a blaze; 



THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

And thence they make a stuff they call 
Rowland’s Macassar-Oil — 

Yet twopence-halfpenny is all 
They give me for my toil.’ 

But I was thinking of a way 
To feed oneself on batter, 

And so go on from day to day 
Getting a little fatter. 

I shook him well from side to side, 

Until his face was blue: 

’Come, tell me how you live,’ I cried, 

‘And what it is you do!’ 



He said ‘I hunt for haddocks’ eyes 
Among the heather bright. 

And work them into waistcoat-buttons 
In the silent night. 

And these I do not sell for gold 
Or coin of silvery shine, 

But for a copper halfpenny, 

And that will purchase nine. 



“it’s my own invention" 227 

‘I sometimes dig for buttered rolls, 

Or set limed twigs for crabs: 

I sometimes search the grassy knolls 
For wheels of Hansom-cabs. 

And that’s the way’ (he gave a wink) 

‘By which I get my wealth —■ 

And very gladly will I drink 
Your Honour’s noble health.’ 

I heard him then, for I had just 
Completed my design 
To keep thq'Menai bridge from rust 
By boiling it in wine. 

I thanked him much for telling me 
The way he got his wealth, 

But chiefly for his wish that he 
Might drink my noble health. 

And now, if e’er by chance I put 
My fingers into glue, 

Or madly squeeze a right-hand foot 
Into a left-hand shoe, 

Or if I drop upon my toe 
A very heavy weight, 

I weep, for it reminds me so 
Of that old man I used to know — 

Whose look was mild, whose speech was slow 
Whose hair was whiter than the snow, 

Whose face was very like a crow, 

With eyes, like cinders, all aglow, 

Who seemed distracted with his woe. 

Who rocked his body to and fro. 

And muttered mumblingly and low, 

As if his mouth were full of dough, 

Who snorted like a buffalo -- 

That summer evening long ago, 

A -sitting on a gate. ” 

As the Knight sang the last words of the ballad, he 
gathered up the reins, and turned his horse’s head along 
the road by which they had come. “You’ve only a few 
yards to go,” he said, “down the hill and over that little 



228 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

brook, and then you’ll be a Queen-But you’ll stay and 

see me off first?” he added as Alice turned with an eager 
look in the direction to which he pointed. “I sha’n’t be 
long. You’ll wait and wave your handkerchief when I get 
to that turn in the road! I think it’ll encourage me, you 
see.” 

“Of course I’ll wait,” said Alice: “and thank you very 



much for coming so far—and for the song—I liked it very 
much.” 

“I hope so,” the Knight said doubtfully: “but you 
didn’t cry so much as I thought you would.” 

So they shook hands, and then the Knight rode slowly 
away into the forest. “It wo’n’t take long to see him off, 
I expect,” Alice said to herself, as she stood watching him. 
“There he goes! Right on his head as usual! However, 
he gets on again pretty easily—that comes of having so 



QUEEN ALICE 229 

many things hung round the horse-” So she went on 

talking to herself, as she watched the horse walking leis¬ 
urely along the road, and the Knight tumbling off, first 
on one side and then on the other. After the fourth or 
fifth tumble he reached the turn, and then she waved her 
handkerchief to him, and waited till he was out of sight. 

“I hope it encouraged him,” she said, as she turned 
to run down the hill: “and now for the last brook, and 
to be a Queen! How grand it sounds!” A very few 
steps brought her to the edge of the brook. “The 
Eighth Square at last!” she cried as she bounded across, 

jjg 

* * * * 

* ♦ ♦ $ + 

and threw herself down to rest on a lawn as soft as moss, 
with little flowerbeds dotted about it here and there. 
“Oh, how glad I am to get here! And what is this on my 
head?” she exclaimed in a tone of dismay, as she put her 
hands up to something very heavy, that fitted tight all 
around her head. 

“But how can it have got there without my knowing 
it?” she said to herself, as she lifted it off, and set it on her 
lap to make out what it could possibly be. 

It was a golden crown. 


Chapter IX 
Queen Alice 

“Well, this is grand!” said Alice. “I never expected I 
should be a Queen so soon—and I'll tell you what it is, 
your Majesty,” she went on, in a severe tone (she was 
always rather fond of scolding herself), “It’ll never do 
for you to be lolling about on the grass like that! Queens 
have to be dignified, you know!” 



230 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

So she got up and walked about—rather stiffly just at 
first, as she was afraid that the crown might come off: but 
she comforted herself with the thought that there was 
nobody to see her, “and if I really am a Queen”, she said 
as she sat down again, “I shall be able to manage it quite 
well in time.” 

Everything was happening so oddly that she didn’t feel 
a bit surprised at finding the Red Queen and the White 
Queen sitting close to her, one on each side: she would 
have liked very much to ask them how they came there, 
but she feared it would not be quite civil. However, there 
would be no harm, she thought, in asking if the game was 

over. “Please, would you tell me-” she began, looking 

timidly at the Red Queen. 

“Speak when you’re spoken to!” the Queen sharply in¬ 
terrupted her. 

“But if everybody obeyed that rule,” said Alice, who 
was always ready for a little argument, “and if you only 
spoke when you were spoken to, and the other person al¬ 
ways waited for you to begin, you see nobody would ever 
say anything, so that-” 

“Ridiculous!” cried the Queen. “Why, don’t you see, 

child-” here she broke off with a frown, and, after 

thinking for a minute, suddenly changed the subject of 
the conversation. “What do you mean by ‘If you really 
are a Queen’? What right have you to call yourself so? 
You ca’n’t be a Queen, you know, till you’ve passed the 
proper examination. And the sooner we begin it, the 
better.” 

“I only said ‘if’!” poor Alice pleaded in a piteous 
tone. 

The two Queens looked at each other, and the Red 
Queen remarked, with a little shudder, “She says she only 
said‘if-” 

“But she said a great deal more than that!” the White 
Queen moaned, wringing her hands. “Oh, ever so much 
more than that!” 

“So you did, you know,” the Red Queen said to Alice. 



QUEEN ALICE 231 

“Always speak the truth—think before you speak—and 
write it down afterwards." 

“I’m sure I didn’t mean-” Alice was beginning, but 

the Red Queen interrupted her impatiently. 

“That’s just what I complain of! You should have 
meant! What do you suppose is the use of a child without 
any meaning? Even a joke should have some meaning— 



and a child’s more important than a joke, I hope. You 
couldn’t deny that, even if you tried with both hands." 

“I don’t deny things with my hands,” Alice objected. 

“Nobody said you did," said the Red Queen. “I said 
you couldn’t if you tried.” 

“She’s in that state of mind”, said the White Queen, 
“that she wants to deny something —only she doesn’t 
know what to deny!” 

“A nasty, vicious temper,” the Red Queen remarked; 
and then there was an uncomfortable silence for a minute 
or two. 

The Red Queen broke the silence by saying, to the 
White Queen, “I invite you to Alice’s dinner-party this 
afternoon.” 










THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


232 

The White Queen smiled feebly, and said “And I in¬ 
vite you.” 

"I didn’t know I was to have a party at all,” said Alice; 
“but, if there is to be one, I think I ought to invite the 
guests.” 

“We gave you the opportunity of doing it,” the Red 
Queen remarked: “but I daresay you’ve not had many 
lessons in manners yet.” 

“Manners are not taught in lessons,” said Alice. “Les¬ 
sons teach you to do sums, and things of that sort.” 

“Can you do Addition?” the White Queen asked. 
“What’s one and one and one and one and one and one 
and one and one and one and one?” 

“I don’t know,” said Alice. "I lost count.” 

“She ca’n't do Addition,” the Red Queen interrupted. 
“Can you do Subtraction? Take nine from eight.” 

“Nine from eight I ca’n’t, you know,” Alice replied 
very readily: “but-” 

“She ca’n’t do Subtraction,” said the White Queen. 
“Can you do Division? Divide a loaf by a knife—what’s 
the answer to that ?” 

“I suppose-” Alice was beginning, but the Red 

Queen answered for her. “Bread-and-butter, of course. 
Try another Subtraction sum. Take a bone from a dog: 
what remains?” 

Alice considered. “The bone wouldn’t remain, of 
course, if I took it—and the dog wouldn’t remain: it 
would come to bite me—and I’m sure I shouldn’t re¬ 
main!” 

“Then you think nothing would remain?” said the 
Red Queen. 

“I think that’s the answer.” 

“Wrong, as usual,” said the Red Queen: “the dog’s 
temper would remain.” 

“But I don’t see how-” 

“Why, look here!” the Red Queen cried. “The dog 
would lose its temper, wouldn’t it?” 

“Perhaps it would,” Alice replied cautiously. 



QUEEN ALICE 233 

“Then if the dog went away, its temper would re¬ 
main!” the Queen exclaimed triumphantly. 

Alice said, as gravely as she could, “They might go dif¬ 
ferent ways.” But she couldn’t help thinking to herself 
“What dreadful nonsense we are talking!” 

“She ca’n’t do sums a bitl” the Queens said together, 
with great emphasis. 

“Can you do sums?” Alice said, turning suddenly on 
the White Queen, for she didn’t like being found, fault 
with so much. 

The Queen gasped and shut her eyes. “I can do Addi¬ 
tion”, she said, “if you give me time—but I ca’n’t do Sub¬ 
traction under any circumstances!” 

“Of course you know your ABC?” said the Red Queen. 

“To be sure I do,” said Alice. 

“So do I,” the White Queen whispered: “we’ll often 
say it over together, dear. And I’ll tell you a secret—I can 
read words of one letter! Isn't that grand? However, don’t 
be discouraged. You’ll come to it in time.” 

Here the Red Queen began again. “Can you answer 
useful questions?” she said. “How is bread made?” 

“I know thatV’ Alice cried eagerly. “You take some 
flour-” 

“Where do you pick the flower?” the White Queen 
asked: “In a garden or in the hedges?” 

"Well, it isn’t picked at all,” Alice explained: “it’s 
ground -” 

“How many acres of ground?” said the White Queen. 
“You mustn’t leave out so many things.” 

"Fan her head!” the Red Queen anxiously interrupted. 
“She’ll be feverish after so much thinking.” So they set to 
work and fanned her with bunches of leaves, till she had 
to beg them to leave off, it blew her hair about so. 

"She’s all right again now,” said the Red Queen. “Do 
you know Languages? What’s the French for fiddle-de- 
dee?” 

"Fiddle-de-dee’s not English,” Alice replied gravely, 

“Who ever said it was?” said the Red Queen. 



234 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

Alice thought she saw a way out of the difficulty, this 
time. “If you’ll tell me what language ‘fiddle-de-dee’ is. 
I’ll tell you the French for it!” she exclaimed trium¬ 
phantly. 

But the Red Queen drew herself up rather stiffly, and 
said, “Queens never make bargains.” 

“I wish Queens never asked questions,” Alice thought 
to herself. 

“Don’t let us quarrel,” the White Queen said in an 
anxious tone. “What is the cause of lightning?” 

“The cause of lightning”, Alice said very decidedly, for 
she felt quite certain about this, “is the thunder—no, no!” 
she hastily corrected herself. “I meant the other way.” 

“It’s too late to correct it,” said the Red Queen: “when 
you’ve once said a thing, that fixes it, and you must take 
the consequences.” 

“Which reminds me-” the White Queen said, look¬ 

ing down and nervously clasping and unclasping her 
hands, “we had such a thunderstorm last Tuesday—I 
mean one of the last set of Tuesdays, you know.” 

Alice was puzzled. “In our country”, she remarked, 
“there’s only one day at a time.” 

The Red Queen said “That’s a poor thin way of do¬ 
ing things. Now here, we mostly have days and nights 
two or three at a time, and sometimes in the winter we 
take as many as five nights together—for warmth, you 
know.” 

"Are five nights warmer than one night, then?” Alice 
ventured to ask. 

“Five times as warm, of course.” 

“But they should be five times as cold, by the same 
rule-” 

“Just so!” cried the Red Queen. “Five times as warm, 
and five times as cold—just as I’m five times as rich as 
you are, and five times as clever!” 

Alice sighed and gave it up. "It’s exactly like a riddle 
with no answer!” she thought. 

“Humpty Dumpty saw it too,” the White Queen went 



QUEEN ALICE 235 

on in a low voice, more as if she were talking to herself. 
"He came to the door with a corkscrew in his hand-” 

"What did he want?” said the Red Queen. 

"He said he would come in,” the White Queen went 
on, "because he was looking for a hippopotamus. Now, 
as it happened, there wasn’t such a thing in the house, 
that morning.” 

"Is there generally?” Alice asked in an astonished tone. 

“Well, only on Thursdays,” said the Queen. 

“I know what he came for,” said Alice: "he wanted to 
punish the fish, because-” 

Here the White Queen began again. "It was such a 
thunderstorm, you ca’n’t think!” ("She never could, you 
know,” said the Red Queen.) "And part of the roof came 
off, and ever so much thunder got in—and it went rolling 
round the room in great lumps—and knocking over the 
tables and things—till I was so frightened, I couldn’t re¬ 
member my own name!” 

Alice thought to herself "I never should try to remem¬ 
ber my name in the middle of an accident! Where would 
be the use of it?” but she did not say this aloud, for fear 
of hurting the poor Queen’s feelings. 

"Your Majesty must excuse her,” the Red Queen said 
to Alice, taking one of the White Queen’s hands in her 
own, and gently stroking it: "she means well, but she 
ca’n’t help saying foolish things as a general rule.” 

The White Queen looked timidly at Alice, who felt she 
ought to say something kind, but really couldn’t think of 
anything at the moment. 

"She never was really well brought up,” the Red Queen 
went on: "but it’s amazing how good-tempered she is! 
Pat her on the head, and see how pleased she’ll be!” But 
this was more than Alice had courage to do. 

“A little kindness—and putting her hair in papers— 
would do wonders with her--” 

The White Queen gave a deep sigh, and laid her head 
on Alice’s shoulder. "I am so sleepy!” she moaned. 

"She’s tired, poor thing!” said the Red Queen. "Smooth 



236 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

her hair—lend her your nightcap—and sing her a sooth¬ 
ing lullaby.” 

“I haven’t got a nightcap with me,” said Alice, as she 
tried to obey the first direction: “and I don’t know any 
soothing lullabies.” 

“I must do it myself, then,” said the Red Queen, and 
she began: 



“Hush-a-by lady, in Alice’s lap! 

Till the feast’s ready, we’ve time for a nap. 

When the feast’s over, we’ll go to the ball — 

Red Queen, and White Queen, and Alice, and all! 

"And now you know the words,” she added, as she put 
her head down on Alice’s other shoulder, “just sing it 
through to me. I’m getting sleepy, too.” In another mo¬ 
ment both Queens were fast asleep, and snoring loud. 

“What am I to do?” exclaimed Alice, looking about in 
great perplexity, as first one round head, and then the 
other, rolled down from her shoulder, and lay like a heavy 
lump in her lap. “I don’t think it ever happened before, 
that any one had to take care of two Queens asleep at 
once! No, not in all the History of England—it couldn’t, 











QUEEN ALICE 237 

you know, because there never was more than one Queen 
at a time. Do wake up, you heavy things!” she went on in 
an impatient tone; but there was no answer but a gentle 
snoring. 

The snoring got more distinct every minute, and sound¬ 
ed more like a tune: at last she could even make out 



words, and she listened so eagerly that, when the two 
great heads suddenly vanished from her lap, she hardly 
missed them. 

She was standing before an arched doorway, over which 
were the words "QUEEN ALICE” in large letters, and 
on each side of the arch there was a bell-handle; one was 








































238 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

marked “Visitors' Bell”, and the other “Servants’ Bell”. 

“I’ll wait till the song’s over,” thought Alice, “and then 
I’ll ring the—the —which bell must I ring?” she went on, 
very much puzzled by the names. “I’m not a visitor, and 
I’m not a servant. There ought to be one marked ’Queen’, 
you know-” 

Just then the door opened a little way, and a creature 
with a long beak put its head out for a moment and said 
“No admittance till the week after next!” and shut the 
door again with a bang. 

Alice knocked and rang in vain for a long time; but at 
last a very old Frog, who was sitting under a tree, got up 
and hobbled slowly towards her: he was dressed in bright 
yellow, and had enormous boots on. 

“What is it, now?” the Frog said in a deep hoiarse 
whisper. 

Alice turned round, ready to find fault with anybody. 
“Where’s the servant whose business it is to answer the 
door?” she began angrily. 

“Which door?” said the Frog. 

Alice almost stamped with irritation at the slow drawl 
in which he spoke. “This door, of course!” 

The Frog looked at the door with his large dull eyes 
for a minute: then he went nearer and rubbed it with his 
thumb, as if he were trying whether the paint would 
come off: then he looked at Alice. 

“To answer the door?” he said. “What’s it been asking 
of ?” He was so hoarse that Alice could scarcely hear him. 

“I don’t know what you mean,” she said. 

“I speaks English, doesn’t I?” the Frog went on. “Or 
are you deaf? What did it ask you? ” 

“Nothing!” Alice said impatiently. “I’ve been knock¬ 
ing at it!” 

“Shouldn’t do that—shouldn’t do that-” the Frog 

muttered. “Wexes it, you know.” Then he went up and 
gave the door a kick with one of his great feet. “You let it 
alone,” he panted out, as he hobbled back to his tree, “and 
it’ll let you alone, you know.” 



QUEEN ALICE 239 

At this moment the door was flung open, and a shrill 
voice was heard singing: 

“To the Looking-Glass world it was Alice that said 
‘I’ve a sceptre in hand, I’ve a crown on my head. 

Let the Looking-Glass creatures, whatever they be 
Come and dine with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and 
me!’ ” 

And hundreds of voices joined in the chorus: 

“Then fill up the glasses as quick as you can, 

And sprinkle the table with buttons and bran: 

Put cats in the coffee, and mice in the tea — 

And welcome Queen Alice with thirty-times-three!’’ 

Then followed a confused noise of cheering, and Alice 
thought to herself “Thirty times three makes ninety. I 
wonder if any one’s counting?” In a minute there was si¬ 
lence again, and the same shrill voice sang another verse: 

“ ‘O Looking-Glass creatures’, quoth Alice, * draw near! 

’Tis an honour to see me, a favour to hear: 

’Tis a privilege high to have dinner and tea 

Along with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me!’ ” 

Then came the chorus again: 

“Then fill up the glasses with treacle and ink, 

Or anything else that is pleasant to drink: 

Mix sand with the cider, and wool with the wine — 

And welcome Queen Alice with ninety-times-nine!’’ 

"Ninety times nine!” Alice repeated in despair. “Oh, 

that’ll never be done! I’d better go in at once-” and in 

she went, and there was a dead silence the moment she 
appeared. 

Alice glanced nervously along the table, as she walked 
up the large hall, and noticed that there were about fifty 
guests, of all kinds: some were animals, some birds, and 
there were even a few flowers among them. “I’m glad 
they’ve come without waiting to be asked,” she thought: 



240 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

“I should never have known who were the right people 
to invite!” 

There were three chairs at the head of the table: the 
Red and White Queens had already taken two of them, 
but the middle one was empty. Alice sat down in it, rath¬ 
er uncomfortable at the silence, and longing for some one 
to speak. 

At last the Red Queen began. “You’ve missed the soup 
and fish,” she said. “Put on the joint!” And the waiters 
set a leg of mutton before Alice, who looked at it rather 
anxiously, as she had never had to carve a joint before. 

“You look a little shy: let me introduce you to that leg 
of mutton,” said the Red Queen. “Alice-Mutton: Mut¬ 

ton—-Alice.” The leg of mutton got up in the dish and 
made a little bow to Alice! and Alice returned the bow, 
not knowing whether to be frightened or amused. 

“May I give you a slice?” she said, taking up the knife 
and fork, and looking from one Queen to the other. 

“Certainly not,” the Red Queen said very, decidedly: 
"it isn’t etiquette to cut anyone you've been introduced 
to. Remove the joint!” And the waiters carried it off, and 
brought a large plum-pudding in its place. 

“I won’t be introduced to the pudding, please,” Alice 
said rather hastily, “or we shall get no dinner at all. May 
I give you some?” 

But the Red Queen looked sulky, and growled “Pud¬ 
ding-Alice: Alice-Pudding. Remove the pudding!” 

and the waiters took it away so quickly that Alice couldn’t 
return its bow. 

However, she didn’t see why the Red Queen should 
be the only one to give orders; so, as an experiment, she 
called out “Waiter! Bring back the pudding!” and there it 
was again in a moment, like a conjuring trick. It was so 
large that she couldn’t help feeling a little shy with it, as 
she had been with the mutton; however, she conquered 
her shyness by a great effort, and cut a slice and handed 
it to the Red Queen. 

“What impertinence!” said the Pudding. “I wonder 



QUEEN ALICE 24I 

how you’d like it, if I were .to cut a slice out oiyoji, you 
creature!” 

It spoke in a thick, suety sort of voice, and Alice hadn’t 
a word to say in reply: she could only sit and look at it 
and gasp. 

“Make a remark,” said the Red Queen: “it’s ridiculous 
to leave all the conversation to the pudding!” 



“Do you know, I’ve had such a quantity of poetry re¬ 
peated to me to-day,” Alice began, a little frightened at 
finding that, the moment she opened her lips, there was 
dead silence, and all eyes were fixed upon her; “and it’s a 
very curious thing, I think—every poem was about fishes 
in some way. Do you know why they’re so fond of fishes, 
all about here?” 

She spoke to the Red Queen, whose answer was a little 
wide of the mark. “As to fishes,” she said, very slowly and 
solemnly, putting her mouth close to Alice’s ear, “her 

I L.C. 



























THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 


242 

White Majesty knows a lovely riddle—all in poetry—all 
about fishes. Shall she repeat it?” 

“Her Red Majesty’s very kind to mention it,” the White 
Queen murmured into Alice’s other ear, in a voice like 
the cooing of a pigeon. “It would be such a treat! May I?” 

“Please do,” Alice said very politely. 

The White Queen laughed with delight, and stroked 
Alice’s cheek. Then she began: 

“ ‘First, the fish must be caught.’ 

That is easy: a baby, I think, could have caught it. 

‘Next, the fish must be bought.’ 

That is easy: a penny, I think, would have bought it. 

‘Now cook me the fish!’ 

That is easy, and will not take more than a minute. 

‘Let it lie in a dish!’ 

That is easy, because it already is in it. 

‘Bring it here! Let me sup!’ 

It is easy to set such a dish on the table. 

‘Take the dish-cover up!’ 

Ah, that is so hard that I fear I'm unable! 

For it holds it like glue — 

Holds the lid to the dish, while it lies in the middle: 

Which is easiest to do, 

Un-dish-cover the fish, or dishcover the riddle?” 

“Take a minute to think about it, and then guess,” said 
the Red Queen. “Meanwhile, we’ll drink your health— 
Queen Alice’s health!” she screamed at the top of her 
voice, and all the guests began drinking it directly, and 
very queerly they managed it: some of them put their 
glasses upon their heads like extinguishers, and drank all 
that trickled down their faces—others upset the de¬ 
canters, and drank the wine as it ran off the edges of the 
table—and three of them (who looked like kangaroos) 
scrambled into the dish of roast mutton, and began 
eagerly lapping up the gravy, “just like pigs in a trough!” 
thought Alice. 



reply, “but I can do quite well without.” 

“That wouldn't be at all the thing,” the Red Queen 
said very decidedly: so Alice tried to submit to it with a 
good grace. 

(“And they did push so!” she said afterwards, when she 



















244 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

was telling her sister the history of the feast. “You would 
have thought they wanted to squeeze me flat!”) 

In fact it was rather difficult for her to keep in her place 
while she made her speech: the two Queens pushed her so, 
one on each side, that they nearly lifted her up into the 

air. “I rise to return thanks-” Alice began: and she 

really did rise as she spoke, several inches; but she got hold 
of the edge of the table, and managed to pull herself down 
again. 

“Take care of yourself!” screamed the White Queen, 
seizing Alice’s hair with both her hands. “Something’s 
going to happen! ” 

And then (as Alice afterwards described it) all sorts of 
things happened in a moment. The candles all grew up to 
the ceiling, looking something like a bed of rushes with 
fireworks at the top. As to the bottles, they each took a 
pair of plates, which they hastily fitted on as wings, and 
so, with forks for legs, went fluttering about in all direc¬ 
tions: “and very like birds they look,” Alice thought to 
herself, as well as she could in the dreadful confusion that 
was beginning. 

At this moment she heard a hoarse laugh at her side, 
and turned to see what was the matter with the White 
Queen; but, instead of the Queen, there was the leg of 
mutton sitting in the chair. “Here I am!” cried a voice 
from the soup-tureen, and Alice turned again, just in time 
to see the Queen’s broad good-natured face grinning at 
her for a moment over the edge of the tureen, before she 
disappeared into the soup. 

There was not a moment to be lost. Already several of 
the guests were lying down in the dishes, and the soup- 
ladle was walking up the table towards Alice’s chair, and 
beckoning to hef impatiently to get out of its way. 

“I ca’n’t stand this any longer!” she cried, as she 
jumped up and seized the tablecloth with both hands: one 
good pull, and plates, dishes, guests, and candles came 
crashing down together in a heap on the floor. 

“And as for you,” she went on, turning fiercely upon 



QUEEN ALICE 245 

the Red Queen, whom she considered as the cause of all 
the mischief—but the Queen was no longer at her side— 
she had suddenly dwindled down to the size of a little 
doll, and was now on the table, merrily running round 
and round after her own shawl, which was trailing be¬ 
hind her. 

At any other time, Alice would have felt surprised at 
this, but she was far too much excited to be surprised at 
anything now. “As for you” she repeated, catching hold 
of the little creature in the very act of jumping over a 
bottle which had just lighted upon the table, “I’ll shake 
you into a kitten, that I will!” 




Chapter X 


Shaking 

She took her off the table as she spoke, and shook her 
backwards and forwards with all her might. 

The Red Queen made no resistance whatever: only her 
face grew very small, and her eyes got large and green: 
and still, as Alice went on shaking her, she kept on 
growing shorter—and fatter—and softer—and rounder— 
and- 


Chapter XI 


Waking 




Chapter XII 


Which Dreamed It? 

“Y our Red Majesty shouldn’t purr so loud,” Alice said, 
rubbing her eyes, and addressing the kitten, respectfully, 
yet with some severity. “You woke me out of oh! such a 
nice dream! And you’ve been along with me, Kitty— 
all through the Looking-glass world. Did you know it, 
dear?” 

It is a very inconvenient habit of kittens (Alice had 
once made the remark) that, whatever you say to them, 
they always purr. “If they would only purr for ‘yes', and 
mew for ‘no’, or any rule of that sort,” she had said, “so 
that one could keep up a conversation! But how can you 
talk with a person if they always say the same thing?” 

On this occasion the kitten only purred: and it was im¬ 
possible to guess whether it meant “yes” or "no”. 

So Alice hunted among the chessmen on the table till 
she had found the Red Queen: then she went down on her 
knees on the hearth-rug, and put the kitten and the 
Queen to look at each other. “Now, Kitty!” she cried, 
clapping her hands triumphantly. “Confess that was what 
you turned into!” 

("But it wouldn’t look at it,” she said, when she was 
explaining the thing afterwards to her sister: “it turned 
away its head, and pretended not to see it: but it looked a 
little ashamed of itself, so I think it must have been the 
Red Queen.”) 

“Sit up a little fnore stiffly, dear!” Alice cried with a 
merry laugh. “And curtsey while you’re thinking what 
to—what to purr. It saves time, remember!” And she 
caught it up and gave it one little kiss, "just in honour of 
its having been a Red Queen”. 

“Snowdrop, my pet!” she went on, looking over her 
shoulder at the White Kitten, which was still patiently 
undergoing its toilet, “when will Dinah have finished 

247 



248 THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS 

with your White Majesty, I wonder? That must be the 

reason you were so untidy in my dream.-Dinah! Do 

you know that you’re scrubbing a White Queen? Really, 
it’s most disrespectful of you!” 

“And what did Dinah turn to, I wonder?” she prattled 
on, as she settled comfortably down, with one elbow on 
the rug, and her chin in her hand, to watch the kittens. 



"Tell me, Dinah, did you turn to Humpty Dumpty? I 
think you did—however, you’d better not mention it to 
your friends just yet, for I’m not sure. 

“By the way, Kitty, if only you’d been really with me 
in my dream, there was one tiling you would have enjoyed 

-1 had such a quantity of poetry said to me, all about 

fishes! To-morrow morning you shall have a real treat. 
All the time you’re eating your breakfast, I’ll repeat ‘The 
Walrus and the Carpenter’ to you; and then you can 
make believe it’s oysters, dear! 





WHICH DREAMED IT? 249 

“Now, Kitty, let's consider who it was that dreamed it 
all. This is a serious question, my dear, and you should 
not go on licking your paw like that—as if Dinah hadn’t 
washed you this morning! You see, Kitty, it must have 
been either me or the Red King. He was part of my 
dream, of course—but then I was part of his dream, too! 
Was it the Red King, Kitty? You were his wife, my dear, 

so you ought to know-Oh, Kitty, do help to settle it! 

I’m sure your paw can wait!” But the provoking kitten 
only began on the other paw, and pretended it hadn’t 
heard the question. 

Which do you think it was? 



A boat, beneath a sunny sky 
Lingering onward dreamily 
In an evening of July— 

Children three that nestle near, 

Eager eye and willing ear, 

Pleased a simple tale to hear— 

Long has paled that sunny sky: 
Echoes fade and memories die: 
Autumn frosts have slain July. 

Still she haunts me, phantomwise. 
Alice moving under skies 
Never seen by waking eyes. 

Children yet, the tale to hear, 

Eager eye and willing ear, 

Lovingly shall nestle near. 

In a Wonderland they lie, 

Dreaming as the days go by, 
Dreaming as the summers die: 

Ever drifting down the stream— 
Lingering in the golden gleam— 

Life, what is it but a dream? 

Editor’s note: The initial letters of this poem 
when read downward give the full name of 
the original Alice—Alice Pleasance Liddell. 


250 






Is all our Life, then, but a dream 
Seen faintly in the golden gleam 
Athwart Time’s dark resistless stream? 

Bowed to the earth with bitter woe, 

Or laughing at some raree-show. 

We flutter idly to and fro. 

Man’s little Day in haste we spend, 
And, from its merry noontide, send 
No glance to meet the silent end. 


253 




PREFACE 


The descriptions, at pp. 452, 453, of Sunday as spent by 
children of the last generation, are quoted verbatim from 
a speech made to me by a child-friend and a letter written 
to me by a lady-friend. 

The Chapters, headed “Fairy Sylvie” and “Bruno’s 
Revenge”, are a reprint, with a few alterations, of a little 
fairy-tale which I wrote in the year 1867, at the request of 
the late Mrs. Gatty, for “Aunt Judy’s Magazine”, which 
she was then editing. 

It was in 1874 ,1 believe, that the idea first occurred to 
me of making it the nucleus of a longer story. As the years 
went on, I jotted down, at odd moments, all sorts of odd 
ideas, and fragments of dialogue, that occurred to me— 
who knows how?—with a transitory suddenness that left 
me no choice but either to record them then and there, or 
to abandon them to oblivion. Sometimes one could trace 
to their source these random flashes of thought—as being 
suggested by the book one was reading, or struck out 
from the “flint” of one’s own mind by the “steel” of a 
friend’s chance remark—but they had also a way of their 
own, of occurring, a propos of nothing—specimens of that 
hopelessly illogical phenomenon, “an effect without a 
cause”. Such, for example, was the last line of “The Hunt¬ 
ing of the Snark”, -which came into my head (as I have 
already related in “The Theatre” for April, 1887) quite 
suddenly, during a solitary walk; and such, again, have 
been passages which occurred in dreams, and which I 
cannot trace to any antecedent cause whatever. There are 
at least two instances of such dream-suggestions in this 
book—one, my Lady’s remark, “it often runs in families, 
just as a love for pastry does”, at p. 306; the other, Eric 
Lindon’s badinage about having been in domestic service, 
at p. 425. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


256 

And thus it came to pass that I found myself at last in 
possession of a huge unwieldy mass of litterature—if the 
reader will kindly excuse the spelling—which only needed 
stringing together, upon the thread of a consecutive story, 
to constitute the book I hoped to write. Only! The task, 
at first, seemed absolutely hopeless, and gave me a far 
clearer idea, than I ever had before, of the meaning of the 
word "chaos”: and I think it must have been ten years, or 
more, before I had succeeded in classifying these odds- 
and-ends sufficiently to see what sort of a story they 
indicated: for the story had to grow out of the incidents, 
not the incidents out of the story. 

I am telling all this, in no spirit of egoism, but because I 
really believe that some of my readers will be interested in 
these details of the "genesis” of a book, which looks so 
simple and straight-forward a matter, when completed, 
that they might suppose it to have been written straight 
off, page by page, as one would write a letter, beginning 
at the beginning and ending at the end. 

It is, no doubt, possible to write a story in that way: 
and, if it be not vanity to say so, I believe that I could, 
myself,—if I were in the unfortunate position (for I do 
hold it to be a real misfortune) of being obliged to produce 
a given amount of fiction in a given time that I could 
“fulfil my task”, and produce my “tale of bricks”, as 
other slaves have done. One thing, at any rate I could 
guarantee as to the story so produced—that it should be 
utterly commonplace, should contain no new ideas what¬ 
ever, and should be very very weary reading! 

This species of literature has received the very appro¬ 
priate name of "padding”—which might fitly be defined 
as "that which all can write and none can read”. That the 
present volume contains no such writing I dare not avow: 
sometimes, in order to bring a picture into its proper place, 
it has been necessary to eke out a page with two or three 
extra lines: but I can honestly say I have put in no more 
than I was absolutely compelled to do. 

My readers may perhaps like to amuse themselves by 



PREFACE 


25 7 

trying to detect, in a given passage, the one piece of “pad¬ 
ding” it contains. While arranging the “slips” into pages, 
I found that the passage, which now extends from the 
top of p. 280 to the middle of p. 282, was 3 lines too short. 
I supplied the deficiency, not by interpolating a word here 
and a word there, but by writing in 3 consecutive lines. 
Now can my readers guess which they are? 

A harder puzzle—if a harder be desired—would be to 
determine, as to the Gardener’s Song, in which cases (if 
any) the stanza was adapted to the surrounding text, and 
in which (if any) the text was adapted to the stanza. 

Perhaps the hardest thing in all literature—at least I 
have found it so: by no voluntary effort can I accomplish 
it: I have to take it as it comes—is to write anything 
original. And perhaps the easiest is, when once an original 
line has been struck out, to follow it up, and to write any 
amount more to the same tune. I do not know if “Alice 
in Wonderland” was an original story—I was, at least, no 
conscious imitator in writing it—but I do know that, since 
it came out, something like a dozen story-books have 
appeared, on identically the same pattern. The path I 
timidly explored—believing myself to be “the first that 
ever burst into that silent sea”—is now a beaten high¬ 
road: all the way-side flowers have long ago been tram¬ 
pled into the dust: and it would be courting disaster for 
me to attempt that style again. 

Hence it is that, in “Sylvie and Bruno”, I have striven 
—with I know not what success—to strike out yet another 
new path: be it bad or good, it is the best I can do. It is 
written, not for money, and not for fame, but in the hope 
of supplying, for the children whom I love, some thoughts 
that may suit those hours of innocent merriment which 
are the very life of Childhood: and also, in the hope of 
suggesting, to them and to others, some thoughts that 
may prove, I would fain hope, not wholly out of harmony 
with the graver cadences of Life. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


258 

If I have not already exhausted the patience of my 
readers, I would like to seize this opportunity—perhaps 
the last I shall have of addressing so many friends at once 
—of putting on record some ideas that have occurred to 
me, as to books desirable to be written—which I should 
much like to attempt, but may not ever have the time or 
power to carry through—in the hope that, if I should 
fail (and the years are gliding away very fast) to finish 
the task I have set myself, other hands may take it 
up. 

First, a Child’s Bible. The only real essentials of this 
would be, carefully selected passages, suitable for a child’s 
reading, and pictures. One principle of selection, which I 
would adopt, would be that Religion should be put before 
a child as a revelation of love —no need to pain and puzzle 
the young mind with the history of crime and punish¬ 
ment. (On such a principle I should, for example, omit 
the history of the Flood.) The supplying of the pictures 
would involve no great difficulty: no new ones would be 
needed: hundreds of excellent pictures already exist, the 
copyright of which has long ago expired, and which 
simply need photo-zincography, or some similar process, 
for their successful reproduction. The book should be 
handy in size—with a pretty attractive-looking cover—in 
a clear legible type—and, above all, with abundance of 
pictures, pictures, pictures! 

Secondly, a book of pieces selected from the Bible—not 
single texts, but passages of from 10 to 20 verses each—to 
be committed to memory. Such passages would be found 
useful, to repeat to one’s self and to ponder over, on many 
occasions when reading is difficult, if not impossible: for 
instance, when lying awake at night—on a railway- 
journey—when taking a solitary walk—in old age, when 
eye-sight is failing or wholly lost—and, best of all, when 
illness, while incapacitating us for reading or any other 
occupation, condemns us to lie awake through many 
weary silent hours: at such a time how keenly one may 
realize the truth of David’s rapturous cry “0 how sweet 



PREFACE 259 

are thy words unto my throat: yea, sweeter than honey unto 
my mouth!” 

I have said “passages”, rather than single texts, be¬ 
cause we have no means of recalling single texts: memory 
needs links, and here are none: one may have a hundred 
texts stored in the memory, and not be able to recall, at 
will, more than half-a-dozen—and those by mere chance: 
whereas, once get hold of any portion of a chapter that has 
been committed to memory, and the whole can be 
recovered: all hangs together. 

Thirdly, a collection of passages, both prose and verse, 
from books other than the Bible. There is not perhaps 
much, in what is called “un-inspired” literature (a mis¬ 
nomer, I hold: if Shakespeare was not inspired, one may 
well doubt if any man ever was), that will bear the pro¬ 
cess of being pondered over, a hundred times: still there 
are such passages—enough, I think, to make a goodly 
store for the memory. 

These two books—of sacred, and secular, passages for 
memory—will serve other good purposes besides merely 
occupying vacant hours: they will help to keep at bay 
many anxious thoughts, worrying thoughts, uncharitable 
thoughts, unholy thoughts. Let me say this, in better 
words than my own, by copying a passage from that most 
interesting book, Robertson’s Lectures on the Epistles to 
the Corinthians, Lecture xlix. “If a man finds himself 
haunted by evil desires and unholy images, which will 
generally be at periodical hours, let him commit to mem¬ 
ory passages of Scripture, or passages from the best 
writers in verse or prose. Let him store his mind with 
these, as safeguards to repeat when he lies awake in some 
restless night, or when despairing imaginations, or gloomy, 
suicidal thoughts, beset him. Let these be to him the 
sword, turning everywhere to keep the way of the Garden 
of Life from the intrusion of profaner footsteps.” 

Fourthly, a “Shakespeare" for girls: that is, an edition 
in which everything, not suitable for the perusal of girls 
of (say) from 10 to 17, should be omitted. Few children 



260 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

under io would be likely to understand or enjoy the great¬ 
est of poets: and those, who have passed out of girlhood, 
may safely be left to read Shakespeare, in any edition, 
“expurgated" or not, that they may prefer; but it seems a 
pity that so many children, in the intermediate stage, 
should be debarred from a great pleasure for want of an 
edition suitable to them. Neither Bowdler’s, Chambers’s, 
Bran dram’s, nor Cun dell’s “Boudoir” Shakespeare, seems 
to me to meet the want: they are not sufficiently “expur¬ 
gated". Bowdler’s is the most extraordinary of all: look¬ 
ing through it, I am filled with a deep sense of wonder, 
considering what he has left in, that he should have cut 
anything out! Besides relentlessly erasing all that is un¬ 
suitable on the score of reverence or decency, I should be 
inclined to omit also all that seems too difficult, or 
not likely to interest young readers. The resulting book 
might be slightly fragmentary: but it would be a real 
treasure to all British maidens who have any taste for 
poetry. 

If it be needful to apologize to any one for the new de¬ 
parture I have taken in this story—by introducing, along 
with what will, I hope, prove to be acceptable nonsense 
for children, some of the graver thoughts of human life— 
it must be to one who has learned the Art of keeping such 
thoughts wholly at a distance in hours of mirth and care¬ 
less ease. To him such a mixture will seem, no doubt, ill- 
judged and repulsive. And that such an Art exists I do not 
dispute: with youth, good health, and sufficient money, it 
seems quite possible to lead, for years together, a life of 
unmixed gaiety—with the exception of one solemn fact, 
with which we are liable to be confronted at any moment, 
even in the midst of the most brilliant company or the 
most sparkling entertainment. A man may fix his own 
times for admitting serious thought, for attending public 
worship, for prayer, for reading the Bible: all such mat¬ 
ters he can defer to that “convenient season", which is so 
apt never to occur at all: but he cannot defer, for one 
single moment, the necessity of attending to a message, 



PREFACE 26l 

which may come before*he has finished reading this page, 
“this night shall thy soul he required of thee” 

The ever-present sense of this grim possibility has been, 
in all ages, 1 an incubus that men have striven to shake off. 
Few more interesting subjects of enquiry could be found, 
by a student of history, than the various weapons that 
have been used against this shadowy foe. Saddest of all 
must have been the thoughts of those who saw indeed an 
existence beyond the grave, but an existence far more 
terrible than annihilation—an existence as filmy, im¬ 
palpable, all but invisible spectres, drifting about, through 
endless ages, in a world of shadows, with nothing to do, 
nothing to hope for, nothing to love! In the midst of the 
gay verses of that genial “bon vivant” Horace, there 
stands one dreary word whose utter sadness goes to one's 
heart. *It is the word “exilium” in the well-known passage 

Omnes eodem cogimur, omnium 
Versatur urnd serius ocius 
Sors exitura et nos in ceternum 
Exilium impositura cymbce. 

Yes, to him this present life—spite of all its weariness 
and all its sorrow—was the only life worth having: all else 
was “exile”! Does it not seem almost incredible that one, 
holding such a creed, should ever have smiled? 

And many in this day, I fear, even though believing in 
an existence beyond the grave far more real than Horace 
ever dreamed of, yet regard it as a sort of “exile” from all 
the joys of life, and so adopt Horace’s theory, and say “let 
us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die”. 

We go to entertainments, such as the theatre—I say 
“we”, for I also go to the play, whenever I get a chance of 
seeing a really good one—and keep at arm's length, if 
possible, the thought that we may not return alive. Yet 
how do you know—dear friend, whose patience has 

1 At the moment, when I had written these words, there was a 
knock at the door, and a telegram was brought me, announcing 
the sudden death of a dear friend. 



262 


SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


carried you through, this garrulous preface—that it may 
not be your lot, when mirth is fastest and most furious, to 
feel the sharp pang, or the deadly faintness, which heralds 
the final crisis—to see, with vague wonder, anxious 
friends bending over you—to hear their troubled whispers 
—perhaps yourself to shape the question, with trembling 
lips, “Is it serious?” and to be told “Yes: the end is near” 
(and oh, how different all Life will look when those words 
are said!)—how do you know, I say, that all this may not 
happen to you, this night? 

And dare you, knowing this, say to yourself “Well, per¬ 
haps it is an immoral play: perhaps the situations are a 
little too ‘risky’, the dialogue a little too strong, the ‘busi¬ 
ness’ a little too suggestive. I don’t say that conscience is 
quite easy: but the piece is so clever, I must see it this 
once! I’ll begin a stricter life to-morrow.” To-morrow, 
and to-morrow, and to-morrow! 

“Who sins in hope, who, sinning, says, 

‘ Sorrow for sin God’s judgement stays!’ 

Against God’s Spirit he lies; quite stops 
Mercy with insult; dares, and drops, 

Like a scorch'd fly, that spins in vain 
Upon the axis of its pain. 

Then takes its doom, to limp and crawl, 

Blind and forgot, from fall to fall.” 

Let me pause for a moment to say that I believe this 
thought, of the possibility of death—if calmly realized, 
and steadily faced—would be one of the best possible tests 
as to our going to any scene of amusement being right or 
wrong. If the thought of sudden death acquires, for you, 
a special horror when imagined as happening in a theatre, 
then be very sure the theatre is harmful for you, however 
harmless it may be for others; and that you are incurring 
a deadly peril in going. Be sure the safest rule is that we 
should not dare to live in any scene in which we dare not 
die. 

But, once realize what the true object is in life—that it 



PREFACE 263 

is not pleasure, not knowledge, not even fame itself, "that 
last infirmity of noble minds”—but that it is the develop¬ 
ment of character , the rising to a higher, nobler, purer 
standard, the building-up of the perfect Man —and then, 
so long as we feel that this is going on, and will (we trust) 
go on for evermore, death has for us no terror; it is not a 
shadow, but a light; not an end, but a beginning! 

One other matter may perhaps seem to call for apology 
—that I should have treated with such entire want of 
sympathy the British passion for "Sport”, which no 
doubt has been in by-gone days, and is still, in some forms 
of it, an excellent school for hardihood and for coolness in 
moments of danger. But I am not entirely without sym¬ 
pathy for genuine "Sport”: I can heartily admire the 
courage of the man who, with severe bodily toil, and at 
the risk of his life, hunts down some "man-eating” tiger: 
and I can heartily sympathize with him when he exults in 
the glorious excitement of the chase and the hand-to- 
hand struggle with the monster brought to bay. But I can 
but look with deep wonder and sorrow on the hunter who, 
at his ease and in safety, can find pleasure in what 
involves, for some defenceless creature, wild terror and a 
death of agony: deeper, if the hunter be one who has 
pledged himself to preach to men the Religion of universal 
Love: deepest of all, if it be one of those “tender and deli¬ 
cate’ beings, whose very name serves as a symbol of Love 
—“thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women’’ 
—whose mission here is surely to help and comfort all that 
are in pain or sorrow! 

“Farewell, farewell! but this I tell 
To thee, thou Wedding-Guest! 

He prayeth well, who loveth well 
Both man and bird and beast. 

He prayeth best, who loveth best 
All things both great and small; 

For the dear God who loveth us. 

He made and loveth all.” 



Chapter I 


Less Bread! More Taxes! 

—and then all the people cheered again, and one man, 
who was more excited than the rest, flung his hat high 
into the air, and shouted (as well as I could make out) 
“Who roar for the Sub-Warden?” Everybody roared, but 
whether it was for the Sub-Warden, or not, did not clearly 
appear: some were shouting “Bread!” and some “Taxes!”, 
but no one seemed to know what it was they really 
wanted. 

All this I saw from the open window of the Warden’s 
breakfast-saloon, looking across the shoulder of the Lord 
Chancellor, who had sprung to his feet the moment the 
shouting began, almost as if he had been expecting it, and 
had rushed to the window which commanded the best 
view of the market-place. 

“What can it all mean?” he kept repeating to himself, 
as, with his hands clasped behind him, and his gown float¬ 
ing in the air, he paced rapidly up and down the room. “I 
never heard such shouting before—and at this time of the 
morning, too! And with such unanimity! Doesn’t it strike 
you as very remarkable ? ’ ’ 

I represented, modestly, that to my ears it appeared that 
they were shouting for different things, but the Chan¬ 
cellor would not listen to my suggestion for a moment. 
“They all shout the same words, I assure you!” he said: 
then, leaning well out of the window, he whispered to a 
man who was standing close underneath, “Keep ’em to¬ 
gether, ca’n’t you? The Warden will be here directly. Give 
’em the signal for the march up!” All this was evidently 
not meant for my ears, but I could scarcely help hearing 
it; considering that my chin was almost on the Chancel¬ 
lor’s shoulder. 


264 



less bread! more taxes! 265 

The “march up” was a very curious sight: a straggling 
procession of men, marching two and two, began from 
the other side of the market-place, and advanced in an 
irregular zig-zag fashion towards the Palace, wildly tack¬ 
ing from side to side, like a sailing vessel making way 
against an unfavourable wind—so that the head of the 
procession was often further from us at the end of 
one tack than it had been at the end of the previous 
one. 

Yet it was evident that all was being done under orders, 
for I noticed that all eyes were fixed on the man who stood 
just under the window, and to whom the Chancellor was 
continually whispering. This man held his hat in one hand 
and a little green flag in the other: whenever he waved the 
flag the procession advanced a little nearer, when he 
dipped it they sidled a little farther off, and whenever he 
waved his hat they all raised a hoarse cheer. “Hoo-roah!” 
they cried, carefully keeping time with the hat as it 
bobbed up and down. “Hoo-roah! Noo! Consti! Tooshun! 
Less! Bread! More! Taxes!” 

“That’ll do, that’ll do!” the Chancellor whispered. “Let 
’em rest a bit till I give you the word. He’s not here yet!” 
But at this moment the great folding-doors of the saloon 
were flung open, and he turned with a guilty start to 
receive His High Excellency. However it was only Bruno, 
and the Chancellor gave a little gasp of relieved anxiety. 

“Morning!” said the little fellow, addressing the re¬ 
mark, in a general sort of way, to the Chancellor and the 
waiters. “Doos 00 know where Sylvie is? I’s looking for 
Sylvie!” 

“She’s with the Warden, I believe, y’reince!” the Chan¬ 
cellor replied with a low bow. There was, no doubt, a 
certain amount of absurdity in applying this title (which, 
as of course you see without my telling you, was nothing 
but “your Royal Highness” condensed into one syllable) 
to a small creature whose father was merely the Warden 
of Outland: still, large excuse must be made for a man 
who had passed several years at the Court of Fairyland, 



266 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

and had there acquired the almost impossible art of 
pronouncing five syllables as one. 

But the bow was lost upon Bruno, who had run out of 
the room, even while the great feat of The Unpronounce¬ 
able Monosyllable was being triumphantly performed. 

Just then, a single voice in the distance was understood 
to shout ‘A speech from the Chancellor!” “Certainly, my 
friends!” the Chancellor replied with extraordinary 
promptitude. “You shall have a speech!” Here one of the 
waiters, who had been for some minutes busy making a 
queer-looking mixture of egg and sherry, respectfully 
presented it on a large silver salver. The Chancellor took 
it haughtily, drank it off thoughtfully, smiled benevolent¬ 
ly on the happy waiter as he set down the empty glass, 
and began. To the best of my recollection this is what he 
said. 

“Ahem! Ahem! Ahem! Fellow-sufferers, or rather suf¬ 
fering fellows-” (“Don’t call ’em names!” muttered the 

man under the window. “I didn’t say felons'.” the Chan¬ 
cellor explained.) “You may be sure that I always sym- 

pa-” (" ’Ear, ’ear!” shouted the crowd, so loudly as 

quite to drown the orator’s thin squeaky voice) “—that I 

always sympa-” he repeated. (“Don’t simper quite so 

much!” said the man under the window. “It makes yer 
look a hidiot!” And, all this time, “ ’Ear, ’ear!” went rum¬ 
bling round the market-place, like a peal of thunder.) 
“That I always sympathize!” yelled the Chancellor, the 
first moment there was silence. “But your true friend is 
the Sub-Warden! Day and night he is brooding on your 
wrongs—I should say your rights —that is to say your 

wrongs —no, I mean your rights -” (“Don’t talk no 

more!” growled the man under the window. “You’re 
making a mess of it!”) At this moment the Sub-Warden 
entered the saloon. He was a thin man, with a mean and 
crafty face, and a greenish-yellow complexion; and he 
crossed the room very slowly, looking suspiciously about 
him as if he thought there might be a savage dog hidden 
somewhere. “Bravo!” he cried, patting the Chancellor on 



less bread! more taxes! 267 

the back. “You did that speech very well indeed. Why, 
you’re a born orator, man!” 

“Oh, that’s nothing!” the Chancellor replied, modestly, 
with downcast eyes. “Most orators are born, you know.” 
The Sub-Warden thoughtfully rubbed his chin. “Why, so 
they are!” he admitted. “I never considered it in that 
light. Still, you did it very well. A word in your ear!” 

The rest of their conversation was all in whispers: so, as 
I could hear no more, I thought I would go and find 
Bruno. 

I found the little fellow standing in the passage, and 
being addressed by one of the men in livery, who stood 
before him, nearly bent double from extreme respectful¬ 
ness, with his hands hanging in front of him like the fins of 
a fish. “His High Excellency”, this respectful man was 
saying, “is in his Study, y’reince!” (He didn’t pronounce 
this quite so well as the Chancellor.) Thither Bruno 
trotted, and I thought it well to follow him. 

The Warden, a tall dignified man with a grave but very 
pleasant face, was seated before a writing-table, which 
was covered with papers, and holding on his knee one of 
the sweetest and loveliest little maidens it has ever been 
my lot to see. She looked four or iiye years older than 
Bruno, but she had the same rosy cheeks and sparkling 
eyes, and the same wealth of curly brown hair. Her eager 
smiling face was turned upwards towards her father’s, and 
it was a pretty sight to see the mutual love with which the 
two faces—one in the Spring of Life, the other in its late 
Autumn—were gazing on each other. 

“No, you’ve never seen him,” the old man was saying: 
“you couldn’t, you know, he’s been away so long—travel¬ 
ing from land to lane), and seeking for health, more years 
than you’ve been alive, little Sylvie!” 

Here Bruno climbed upon his other knee, and a good 
deal of kissing, on a rather complicated system, was the 
result. 

“He only came back last night,” said the Warden, when 
the kissing was over: “he’s been traveling post-haste, for 



268 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

the last thousand miles or so, in order to be here on Syl¬ 
vie’s birthday. But he’s a very early riser, and I dare say 
he’s in the Library already. Come with me and see him. 
He’s always kind to children. You’ll be sure to like him.” 

“Has the Other Professor come too?” Bruno asked in 
an awe-struck voice. 

“Yes, they arrived together. The Other Professor is— 
well, you wo’n’t like him quite so much, perhaps. He's a 
little more dreamy, you know.” 

“I wiss Sylvie was a little more dreamy,” said Bruno. 

“What do you mean, Bruno?” said Sylvie. 

Bruno went on addressing his father. “She says she 
ca’n’t, oo know. But I thinks it isn’t ca’n’t, it’s wo'n’t." 

“Says she ca’n’t dream!” the puzzled Warden repeated. 

“She do say it,” Bruno persisted. “When I says to her 
‘Let’s stop lessons!’, she says 'Oh, I ca’n’t dream of letting 
oo stop yet!’ ” 

“He always wants to stop lessons”, Sylvie explained, 
“five minutes after we begin!” 

“Five minutes’ lessons a day!” said the Warden. “You 
wo’n’t learn much at that rate, little man!” 

“That’s just what Sylvie says,” Bruno rejoined. “She 
says I wo’n’t learn my lessons. And I tells her, over and 
over, I ca’n’t learn ’em. And what does oo think she says? 
She says ‘It isn’t ca’n’t, it’s wo’n’tV ” 

“Let’s go and see the Professor,” the Warden said, 
wisely avoiding further discussion. The children got down 
off his knees, each secured a hand, and the happy trio set 
off for the Library—followed by me. I had come to the 
conclusion by this time that none of the party (except, 
for a few moments, the Lord Chancellor) was in the least 
able to see me. 

“What’s the matter with him?” Sylvie asked, walking 
with a little extra sedateness, by way of example to Bruno 
at the other side, who never ceased jumping up and down. 

“What was the matter—but I hope he’s all right now— 
was lumbago, and rheumatism, and that kind of thing. 
He’s been curing himsetf, you know: he’s a very learned 



less bread! more taxes! 269 

doctor. Why, he’s actually invented three new diseases, 
besides a new way of breaking your collar-bone!” 

“Is it a nice way?” said Bruno. 

“Well, hum, not very,” the Warden said, as we entered 
the Library. “And here is the Professor. Good morning, 
Professor! Hope you’re quite rested after your journey!” 

A jolly-looking, fat little man, in a flowery dressing- 
gown, with a large book under each arm, came trotting in 
at the other end of the room, and was going straight 
across without taking any notice of the children. “I’m 
looking for Vol. Three,” he said. “Do you happen to have 
seen it?” 

“You don’t see my children, Professor!” the Warden 
exclaimed, taking him by the shoulders and turning him 
round to face them. 

The Professor laughed violently: then he gazed at them 
through his great spectacles, for a minute or two, without 
speaking. 

At last he addressed Bruno. “I hope you have had a 
good night, my child?” 

Bruno looked puzzled. “I’s had the same night oo’ve 
had,” he replied. “There’s only been one night since 
yesterday!” 

It was the Professor’s turn to look puzzled now. He 
took off his spectacles, and rubbed them with his hand¬ 
kerchief. Then he gazed at them again. Then he turned to 
the Warden. “Are they bound? ” he enquired. 

“No, we aren’t,” said Bruno, who thought himself 
quite able to answer this question. 

The Professor shook his head sadly. “Not even half¬ 
bound?” 

“Why would we be half-bound?” said Bruno. “We’re 
not prisoners!” 

But the Professor had forgotten all about them by this 
time, and was speaking to the Warden again. “You’ll be 
glad to hear”, he was saying, “that the Barometer’s 
beginning to move-” 

“Well, which way?” said the Warden—adding to the 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


270 

children/‘Not that I care, you know. Only he thinks it 
affects the weather. He’s a wonderfully clever man, you 
know. Sometimes he says things that only the Other 
Professor can understand. Sometimes he saj^s things that 
nobody can understand! Which way is it, Professor? Up or 
down?” 

“Neither!” said the Professor, gently clapping his 
hands. “It’s going sideways—if I may so express myself.” 

“And what kind of weather does that produce?” said 
the Warden. “Listen children! Now you'll hear something 
worth knowing!” 

“Horizontal weather,” said the Professor, and made 
straight for the door, very nearly trampling on Bruno, 
who had only just time to get out of his way. 

" Isn’t he learned?” the Warden said, looking after him 
with admiring eyes. “Positively he runs over with learn¬ 
ing!” 

“But he needn’t run over me\” said Bruno. 

The Professor was back in a moment: he had changed 
his dressing-gown for a frock-coat, and had put on a pair 
of very strange-looking boots, the tops of which were 
open umbrellas. “I thought you’d like to see them,” he 
said. “These are the boots for horizontal weather!” 

“But what’s the use of wearing umbrellas round one’s 
knees?” 

“In ordinary rain,” the Professor admitted, “they 
would not be of much use. But if ever it rained horizontally, 
you know, they would be invaluable—simply invaluable! ’ ’ 

“Take the Professor to the breakfast-saloon, children,” 
said the Warden. “And tell them not to wait for me. I had 
breakfast early, as I’ve some business to attend to.” The 
children seized the Professor’s hands, as familiarly as if 
they had known him for years, and hurried him away. I 
followed respectfully behind. 



Chapter II 


L’Amie Inconnue 

As we entered the breakfast saloon, the Professor was 
saying "—and he had breakfast by himself, early: so he 
begged you wouldn’t wait for him, my Lady. This way, 
my Lady,” he added, “this way!” And then, with (as it 
seemed to me) most superfluous politeness, he flung open 
the door of my compartment, and ushered in “—a young 
and lovely lady!” I muttered to myself with some bitter¬ 
ness. "And this is, of course, the opening scene of Vol. I. 
She is the Heroine. And I am one of those subordinate 
characters that only turn up when needed for the develop¬ 
ment of her destiny, and whose final appearance is out¬ 
side the church, waiting to greet the Happy Pair!” 

“Yes, my lady, change at Fayfield,” were the next 
words I heard (oh that too obsequious Guard!), "next 
station but one.” And the door closed, and the lady 
settled down into her corner, and the monotonous throb 
of the engine (making one feel as if the train were some 
gigantic monster, whose very circulation we could feel) 
proclaimed that we were once more speeding on our way. 
“The lady had a perfectly formed nose,” I caught myself 

saying to myself, “hazel eyes, and lips-” and here it 

occurred to me that to see, for myself, what “the lady” 
was really like, would be more satisfactory than much 
speculation. 

I looked round cautiously, and—was entirely disap¬ 
pointed of my hope. The veil, which shrouded her whole 
face, was too thick for me to see more than the glitter of 
bright eyes and the hazy outline of what might be a lovely 
oval face, but might also, unfortunately, be an equally 
zmlovely one. I closed my eyes again, saying to myself 
“—couldn’t have a better chance for an experiment in 
Telepathy! I’ll think out her face and afterwards test the 
portrait with the original.” 

At first, no result at all crowned my efforts, though I 

271 



272 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

“divided my swift mind", now hither, now thither, in a 
way that I felt sure would have made iEneas green with 
envy: but the dimly-seen oval remained as provokingly 
blank as ever—a mere Ellipse, as if in some mathematical 
diagram, without even the Foci that might be made to do 
duty as a nose and a mouth. Gradually, however, the 
conviction came upon me that I could, by a certain con¬ 
centration of thought, think the veil away, and so get a 
glimpse of the mysterious face—as to which the two 
questions, “is she pretty?” and “is she plain?”, still hung 
suspended, in my mind, in beautiful equipoise. 

Success was partial—and fitful—still there was a re¬ 
sult: ever and anon, the veil seemed to vanish, in a sudden 
flash of light: but, before I could fully realize the face, all 
was dark again. In each such glimpse, the face seemed to 
grow more childish and more innocent: and, when I had 
at last thought the veil entirely away, it was, unmistake- 
ably, the sweet face of little Sylvie! 

"So, either I’ve been dreaming about Sylvie,” I said to 
myself, “and this is the reality. Or else I’ve really been 
with Sylvie, and this is a dream! Is Life itself a dream, I 
wonder?” 

To occupy the time, I got out the letter which had 
caused me to take this sudden railway-journey from my 
London home down to a strange fishing-town on the 
North coast, and read it over again: 

“Dear old Friend, 

“I’m sure it will be as great a pleasure to me, as it can 
possibly be to you, to meet once more after so many years: and 
of course I shall be ready to give you all the benefit of such medi¬ 
cal skill as I have: only, you know, one mustn’t violate profes¬ 
sional etiquette! And you are already in the hands of a first-rate 
London doctor, with whom it would be utter affectation for me 
to pretend \o compete. (I make no doubt he is right in saying the 
heart is affected: all your symptoms point that way.) One thing, 
at any rate, I have already done in my doctorial capacity — 
secured you a bedroom on the ground-floor, so that you will not 
need to ascend the stairs at all. 



l’amie inconnue 


273 

“I shall expect you by last train on Friday, in accordance 
with your letter: and, till then, I shall say, in the words of the 
old song, 'Oh for Friday nicht! Friday’s lang a-comingl’ 

“Yours always, 

"Arthur Forester 

“P.S. Do you believe in Fate?" 

This Postscript puzzled me sorely. "He is far too sen¬ 
sible a man”, I thought, "to have become a Fatalist. And 
yet what else can he mean by it?” And, as I folded up the 
letter and put it away, I inadvertently repeated the words 
aloud. "Do you believe in Fate?” 

The fair "Incognita” turned her head quickly at the 
sudden question. "No, I don’t!” she said with a smile. 
"Do you?” 

"I—I didn't mean to ask the question!” I stammered, a 
little taken aback at having begun a conversation in so 
unconventional a fashion. 

The lady’s smile became a laugh—not a mocking laugh, 
but the laugh of a happy child who is perfectly at her ease. 
"Didn’t you?” she said. "Then it was a case of what you 
Doctors call ‘unconscious cerebration’?” 

"I am no Doctor,” I replied. "Do I look so like one? Or 
what makes you think it?” 

She pointed to the book I had been reading, which was 
so lying that its title, "Diseases of the Heart”, was plainly 
visible. 

"One needn’t be a Doctor”, I said, "to take an interest 
in medical books. There’s another class of readers; who 
are yet more deeply interested-” 

"You mean the Patients ?” she interrupted, while a 
look of tender pity gave new sweetness to her face. “But”, 
with an evident wish to avoid a possibly painful topic, 
“one needn’t be either, to take an interest in books of 
Science. Which contain the greatest amount of Science, 
do you think, the books, or the minds?” 

"Rather a profound question for a lady!" I said to my- 

L.C. 


K 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


274 

self, holding, with the conceit so natural to Man, that 
Woman’s intellect is essentially shallow. And I considered 
a minute before replying. “If you mean living minds, I 
don’t think it’s possible to decide. There is so much writ¬ 
ten Science that no living person has ever read : and there 
is so much thought-out Science that hasn’t yet been writ¬ 
ten. But, if you mean the whole human race, then I think 
the minds have it: everything, recorded in hooks, must 
have once been in some mind, you know.” 

“Isn’t that rather like one of the Rules in Algebra?” 
my Lady enquired. (“Algebra too!” I thought with in¬ 
creasing wonder.) “I mean, if we consider thoughts as 
factors, may we not say that the Least Common Multiple 
of all the minds contains that of all the books; but not the 
other way?” 

“Certainly we may!” I replied, delighted with the illus¬ 
tration. “And what a grand thing it would be”, I went on 
dreamily, thinking aloud rather than talking, “if we could 
only apply that Rule to books! You know, in finding the 
Least Common Multiple, we strike out a quantity wher¬ 
ever it occurs, except in the term where it is raised to its 
highest power. So we should have to erase every recorded 
thought, except in the sentence where it is expressed with 
the greatest intensity.” 

My Lady laughed merrily. “Some books would be 
reduced to blank paper, I’m afraid!” she said. 

“They would. Most libraries would be terribly dimin¬ 
ished in hulk. But just think what they would gain in 
quality !” 

“When will it be done?” she eagerly asked. “If there’s 
any chance of it in my time, I think I’ll leave off reading, 
and wait for it!” 

“Well, perhaps in another thousand years or so-” 

“Then there’s no use waiting!” said my Lady. “Let’s 
sit down. Uggug, my pet, come and sit by me!” 

“Anywhere but by mel” growled the Sub-Warden. 
“The little wretch always manages to upset his coffee!” 

I guessed at once (as perhaps the reader will also have 



l’amie inconnue 


275 

guessed, if, like myself, he is very clever at drawing con¬ 
clusions) that my Lady was the Sub-Warden’s wife, and 
that Uggug (a hideous fat boy, about the same age as 
Sylvie, with the expression of a prize-pig) was their son. 
Sylvie and Bruno, with the Lord Chancellor, made up a 
party of seven. 

“And you actually got a plunge-bath every morning?'' 
said the Sub-Warden, seemingly in continuation of a 
conversation with the Professor. “Even at the little 
roadside-inns?” 

“Oh, certainly, certainly!” the Professor replied with a 
smile on his jolly face. “Allow me to explain. It is, in fact, 
a very simple problem in Hydrodynamics. (That means a 
combination of Water and Strength.) If we take a plunge- 
bath, and a man of great strength (such as myself) about 
to plunge into it, we have a perfect example of this 
science. I am bound to admit”, the Professor continued, 
in a lower tone and with downcast eyes, “that we need a 
man of remarkable strength. He must be able to spring 
from the floor to about twice his own height, gradually 
turning over as he rises, so as to come down again head 
first.” 

“Why, you need a flea, not a man\” exclaimed the Sub- 
Warden. 

“Pardon me,” said the Professor. “This particular kind 
of bath is not adapted for a flea. Let us suppose”, he con¬ 
tinued, folding his table-napkin into a graceful festoon, 
"that this represents what is perhaps the necessity of this 
Age—the Active Tourist’s Portable Bath. You may de¬ 
scribe it briefly, if you like,” looking at the Chancellor, 
“by the letters A. T. P. B.” 

The Chancellor, much disconcerted at finding every¬ 
body looking at him, could only murmur, in a shy 
whisper, “Precisely so!” 

“One great advantage of this plunge-bath”, continued 
the Professor, “is that it requires only half-a-gallon of 
water-” 


"I don’t call it a piunge-boXYi”, His Sub-Excellency 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


276 

remarked, "unless your Active Tourist goes right 
underl” 

"But he does go right under," the old man gently re¬ 
plied. "The A. T. hangs up the P. B. on a nail— thus. He 
then empties the water-jug into it—places the empty jug 
below the bag—leaps into the air—descends head-first 
into the bag—the water rises round him to the top of the 
bag—and there you are!” he triumphantly concluded. 
"The A. T. is as much under water as if he’d gone a mile 
or two down into the Atlantic!” 

"And he’s drowned, let us say, in about four min¬ 
utes-” 

"By no means!” the Professor answered with a proud 
smile. "After about a minute, he quietly turns a tap at the 
lower end of the P. B.—all the water runs back into the 
jug—and there you are again!” 

“But how in the world is he to get out of the bag 
again?” 

“That, I take it,” said the Professor, "is the most beau¬ 
tiful part of the whole invention. All the way up the P. B. 
inside, are loops for the thumbs; so it's something like 
going up-stairs, only perhaps less comfortable; and, by 
the time the A. T. has risen out of the bag, all but his 
head, he’s sure to topple over, one way or the other—the 
Law of Gravity secures that. And there he is on the floor 
again!” 

"A little bruised, perhaps?” 

"Well, yes, a little bruised; but having had his plunge- 
bath: that's the great thing.” 

"Wonderful! It’s almost beyond belief!” murmured the 
Sub-Warden. The Professor took it as a compliment, and 
bowed with a gratified smile. 

"Quite beyond belief!” my Lady added—meaning, no 
doubt, to be more complimentary still. The Professor 
bowed, but he didn’t smile this time. 

"I can assure you”, he said earnestly, "that, provided 
the bath was made, I used it every morning. I certainly 
ordered it —that I am clear about—my only doubt is. 



BIRTHDAY-PRESENTS 2 77 

whether the man ever finished making it. It’s difficult to 

remember, after so many years-” 

At this moment the door, very slowly and creakingly, 
began to open, and Sylvie and Bruno jumped up, and ran 
to meet the well-known footstep. 


Chapter III 
Birthday-Presents 

“It’s my brother!” the Sub-Warden exclaimed, in a 
warning whisper. "Speak out and be quick about it!” 

The appeal was evidently addressed to the Lord Chan¬ 
cellor, who instantly replied, in a shrill monotone, like a 
little boy repeating the alphabet, “As I was remarking, 
your Sub-Excellency, this portentous movement-” 

“You began too soon!” the other interrupted, scarcely 
able to restrain himself to a whisper, so great was his 
excitement. “He couldn’t have heard you. Begin again!” 

“As I was remarking,” chanted the obedient Lord Chan¬ 
cellor, “this portentous movement has already assumed 
the dimensions of a Revolution!” 

“And what are the dimensions of a Revolution?” The 
voice was genial and mellow, and the face of the tall dig¬ 
nified old man, who had just entered the room, leading 
Sylvie by the hand, and with Bruno riding triumphantly 
on his shoulder, was too noble and gentle to have scared a 
less guilty man: but the Lord Chancellor turned pale 
instantly, and could hardly articulate the words “The 
dimensions—your—your High Excellency? I—I—scarce¬ 
ly comprehend!” 

“Well, the length, breadth, and thickness, if you like it 
better!” And the old man smiled, half-contemptuously. 

The Lord Chancellor recovered himself with a great 
effort, and pointed to the open window. “If your High 
Excellency will listen for a moment to the shouts of the 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


278 

exasperated populace—" (“of the exasperated popu¬ 
lace!” the Sub-Warden repeated in a louder tone, as the 
Lord Chancellor, being in a state of abject terror, had 
dropped almost into a whisper) “—you will understand 
what it is they want.” 

And at that moment there surged into the room a 
hoarse confused cry, in which the only clearly audible 
words were “Less—bread—More—taxes!” The old man 
laughed heartily. “What in the world-” he was begin¬ 

ning: but the Chancellor heard him not. “Some mistake!” 
he muttered, hurrying to the window, from which he 
shortly returned with an air of relief. ‘‘Now listen!” he 
exclaimed, holding up his hand impressively. And now 
the words came quite distinctly, and with the regularity 
of the ticking of a clock, “More—bread—Less—taxes!” 

“More bread!” the Warden repeated in astonishment. 
“Why, the new Government Bakery was opened only last 
week, and I gave orders to sell the bread at cost-price 
during the present scarcity! What can they expect more?” 

“The Bakery’s closed, y’reince!” the Chancellor said, 
more loudly and clearly than he had spoken yet. He was 
emboldened by the consciousness that here, at least, he 
had evidence to produce: and he placed in the Warden’s 
hands a few printed notices, that were lying ready, with 
some open ledgers, on a side-table. 

“Yes, yes, I see!” the Warden muttered, glancing care¬ 
lessly through them. "Order countermanded by my 
brother, and supposed to be my doing! Rather sharp prac¬ 
tice! It’s all right!” he added in a louder tone. “My name 
is signed to it: so I take it on myself. But what do you 
mean by ‘Less Taxes’? How can they be less? I abolished 
the last of them a month ago!” 

“It’s been put on again, y’reince, and by y’reince’s 
own orders!” and other printed notices were submitted 
for inspection. 

The Warden, whilst looking them over, glanced once 
or twice at the Sub-Warden, who had seated himself be¬ 
fore one of the open ledgers, and was quite absorbed in 



BIRTHDAY-PRESENTS 279 

adding it up; but he merely repeated “It's all right. I 
accept it as my doing." 

“And they do say”, the Chancellor went on sheepishly 
—looking much more like a convicted thief than an 
Officer of State, “that a change of Government, by the 
abolition of the Sub-Warden—I mean,” he hastily added, 
on seeing the Warden’s look of astonishment, “the 
abolition of the office of Sub-Warden, and giving the 
present holder the right to act as FVce-Warden whenever 
the Warden is absent—would appease all this seedling 
discontent. I mean,” he added, glancing at a paper he 
held in his hand, “all this seething discontent!” 

“For fifteen years”, put in a deep but very harsh voice, 
“my husband has been acting as Sub-Warden. It is too 
long! It is much too long!” My Lady was a vast creature 
at all times: but, when she frowned and folded her arms, 
as now, she looked more gigantic than ever, and made one 
try to fancy what a haystack would look like, if out of 
temper. 

“He would distinguish himself as a Vice!” my Lady 
proceeded, being far too stupid to see the double meaning 
of her words. “There has been no such Vice in Outland 
for many a long year, as he would be!” 

“What course would you suggest, Sister?” the Warden 
mildly enquired. 

My Lady stamped, which was undignified: and snorted, 
which was ungraceful. “This is no jesting matter!” she 
bellowed. 

“I will consult my brother,” said the Warden. “Bro¬ 
ther!” 

“-and seven makes a hundred and ninety-four, 

which is sixteen and twopence,” the Sub-Warden replied. 
“Put down two and carry sixteen.” 

The Chancellor raised his hands and eyebrows, lost in 
admiration. “Such a man of business!” he murmured. 

“Brother, could I have a word with you in my Study?” 
the Warden said in a louder tone. The Sub-Warden rose 
with alacrity, and the two left the room together. 



28 o 


SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


My Lady turned to the Professor, who had uncovered 
the urn, and was taking its temperature with his pocket- 
thermometer. “Professor!” she began, so loudly and sud¬ 
denly that even Uggug, who had gone to sleep in his 
chair, left off snoring and opened one eye. The Professor 
pocketed his thermometer in a moment, clasped his 
hands, and put his head on one side with a meek smile. 

“You were teaching my son before breakfast, I 
believe?” my Lady loftily remarked. “I hope he strikes 
you as having talent?” 

“Oh, very much so indeed, my Lady!” the Professor 
hastily replied, unconsciously rubbing his ear, while some 
painful recollection seemed to cross his mind. “I was very 
forcibly struck by His Magnificence, I assure you!” 

“He is a charming boy!” my Lady exclaimed. "Even 
his snores are more musical than those of other boys!” 

If that were so, the Professor seemed to think, the 
snores of other boys must be something too awful to be 
endured: but he was a cautious man, and he said nothing. 

“And he’s so clever!” my Lady continued “No one will 
enjoy your Lecture more—by the way, have you fixed the 
time for it yet? You’ve never given one, you know: and it 
was promised years ago, before you-” 

“Yes, yes, my Lady, I know! Perhaps next Tuesday— 
or Tuesday week-” 

“That will do very well,” said my Lady, graciously. “Of 
course you will let the Other Professor lecture as well?” 

“I think not, my Lady,” the Professor said with some 
hesitation. “You see, he always stands with his back to 
the audience. It does very well for reciting; but for lec¬ 
turing -” 

"You are quite right,” said my Lady. "And, now I 
come to think of it, there would hardly be time for more 
than one Lecture. And it will go off all the better, if we 
begin with a Banquet, and a Fancy-dress Ball- 

"It will indeed!” the Professor cried, with enthusiasm. 

"I shall come as a Grass-hopper,” my Lady calmly pro¬ 
ceeded. "What shall you come as, Professor?” 



BIRTHDAY-PRESENTS 28l 

The Professor smiled feebly. “I shall come as—as early 
as I can, my Lady!” 

"You mustn’t come in before the doors are opened,” 
said my Lady. 

"I ca’n’t,” said the Professor. "Excuse me a moment. 

As this is Lady Sylvie’s birthday, I would like to-” 

and he rushed away. 

Bruno began feeling in his pockets, looking more and 
more melancholy as he did so: then he put his thumb in 
his mouth, and considered for a minute: then he quietly 
left the room. 

He had hardly done so before the Professor was back 
again, quite out of breath. "Wishing you many happy 
returns of the day, my dear child!” he went on/address¬ 
ing the smiling little girl, who had run to meet him. 
"Allow me to give you a birthday-present. It's a second¬ 
hand pin-cushion, my dear. And it only cost fourpence- 
halfpenny!” 

"Thank you, it’s very pretty!” And Sylvie rewarded the 
old man with a hearty kiss. 

"And the pins they gave me for nothing!” the Professor 
added in high glee. "Fifteen of em, and only one bent!” 

"I’ll make the bent one into a hook\” said Sylvie. 
“To catch Bruno with, when he runs away from his 
lessons!” 

"You ca'n't guess what my present is!” said Uggug, 
who had taken the butter-dish from the table, and was 
standing behind her, with a wicked leer on his face. 

"No, I ca’n’t guess,” Sylvie said without looking up. 
She was still examining the Professor’s pincushion. 

"It’s thisl” cried the bad boy, exultingly, as he emptied 
the dish over her, and then, with a grin of delight at his 
own cleverness, looked round for applause. 

Sylvie coloured crimson, as she shook off the butter 
from her frock: but she kept her lips tight shut, and walked 
away to the window, where she stood looking out and 
trying to recover her temper. 

Uggug’s triumph was a very short one: the Sub-War- 



282 


SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


den had returned, just in time to be a witness of his dear 
child’s playfulness, and in another moment a skilfully 
applied box on the ear had changed his grin of delight 
into a howl of pain. 

“My darling!” cried his mother, enfolding him in her fat 
arms. “Did they box his ears for nothing? A precious pet!” 

“It’s not for nothing !” growled the angry father. “Are 
you aware, Madam, that I pay the house-bills, out of a 
fixed annual sum? The loss of all that wasted butter falls 
on me\ Do you hear, Madam!” 

“Hold your tongue, Sir!” My Lady spoke very quietly 
—almost in a whisper. But there was something in her 
look which silenced him. “Don’t you see it was only a 
joke ? And a very clever one, too! He only meant that he 
loved nobody hut her! And, instead of being pleased with 
the compliment, the spiteful little thing has gone away in 
a huff!” 

The Sub-Warden was a very good hand at changing a 
subject. He walked across to the window. “My dear,” he 
said, “is that a pig that I see down below, rooting about 
among your flower-beds?” 

“A pigl” shrieked my Lady, rushing madly to the win¬ 
dow, and almost pushing her husband out, in her anxiety 
to see for herself. “Whose pig is it? How did it get in? 
Where’s that crazy Gardener gone?” 

At this moment Bruno re-entered the room, and pass¬ 
ing Uggug (who was blubbering his loudest, in the hope 
of attracting notice) as if he was quite used to that sort of 
thing, he ran up to Sylvie and threw his arms round her. 
“I went to my toy-cupboard”, he said with a very sorrow¬ 
ful face, “to see if there were somefin fit for a present for 
00! And there isn’t nuffin! They’s all broken, every one! 
And I haven’t got no money left, to buy 00 a birthday- 
present! And I ca’n’t give 00 nuffin but this]” (“This” 
was a very earnest hug and a kiss.) 

"Oh, thank you, darling!” cried Sylvie. “I like your 
present best of all!” (But if so, why did she give it back so 
quickly?) 



BIRTHDAY-PRESENTS 


283 

His Sub-Excellency turned and patted the two children 
on the head with his long lean hands. “Go away, dears!” 
he said. “There's business to talk over.” 

Sylvie and Bruno went away hand in hand: but, on 
reaching the door, Sylvie came back again and went up to 
Uggug timidly. “I don't mind about the butter,” she said, 
“and I—I’m sorry he hurt you!” And she tried to shake 
hands with the little ruffian: but Uggug only blubbered 
louder, and wouldn't make friends. Sylvie left the room 
with a sigh. 

The Sub-Warden glared angrily at his weeping son. 
“Leave the room. Sirrah!” he said, as loud as he dared. 
His wife was still leaning out of the window, and kept re¬ 
peating “I ca’n’t see that pig! Where is it?” 

“It’s moved to the right—now it's gone a little to the 
left,” said the Sub-Warden: but he had his back to the 
window, and was making signals to the Lord Chancellor, 
pointing to Uggug and the door, with many a cunning 
nod and wink. 

The Chancellor caught his meaning at last, and cross¬ 
ing the room, took that interesting child by the ear—the 
next moment he and Uggug were out of the room, and 
the door shut behind them: but not before one piercing 
yell had rung through the room, and reached the ears of 
the fond mother. 

“What is that hideous noise?” she fiercely asked, turn¬ 
ing upon her startled husband. 

“It’s some hyaena—or other,” replied the Sub-Warden, 
looking vaguely up to the ceiling, as if that was where 
they usually were to be found. “Let us to business, my 
dear. Here comes the Warden.” And he picked up from 
the floor a wandering scrap of manuscript, on which I just 
caught the words “after which Election duly holden the 
said Sibimet and Tabikat his wife may at their pleasure 

assume Imperial-” before, with a guilty look, he 

crumpled it up in his hand. 



Chapter IV 
A Cunning Conspiracy 


The Warden entered at this moment: and dose behind 
him came the Lord Chancellor, a little flushed and out of 
breath, and adjusting his wig, which appeared to have 
been dragged partly off his head. 

“But where is my precious child?" my Lady enquired, 
as the four took their seats at the small side-table de¬ 
voted to ledgers and bundles and bills. 

“He left the room a few minutes ago—with the Lord 
Chancellor," the Sub-Warden briefly explained. 

“Ah!” said my Lady, graciously smiling on that high 
official. “Your Lordship has a very taking way with chil¬ 
dren! I doubt if any one could gain the ear of my darling 
Uggug so quickly as you can!” For an entirely stupid 
woman, my Lady's remarks were curiously full of mean¬ 
ing, of which she herself was wholly unconscious. 

The Chancellor bowed, but with a very uneasy air. “I 
think the Warden was about to speak,” he remarked, evi¬ 
dently anxious to change the subject. 

But my Lady would not be checked. “He is a clever 
boy,” she continued with enthusiasm, “but he needs a 
man like your Lordship to draw him outl ” 

The Chancellor bit his lip, and was silent. He evidently 
feared that, stupid as she looked, she understood what she 
said this time, and was having a joke at his expense. He 
might have spared himself all anxiety: whatever acci¬ 
dental meaning her words might have, she herself never 
meant anything at all. 

“It is all settled!” the Warden announced, wasting no 
time over preliminaries. “The Sub-Wardenship is abolish¬ 
ed, and my brother is appointed to act as Vice-Warden 
whenever I am absent. So, as I am going abroad for a 
while, he will enter on his new duties at once.” 

"And there will really be a Vice after all?” my Lady 
enquired. 

284 



A CUNNING CONSPIRACY 


285 


“I hope so!" the Warden smilingly replied. 

My Lady looked much pleased, and tried to clap her 
hands: but you might as well have knocked two feather¬ 
beds together, for any noise it made. “When my husband 
is Vice", she said, “it will be the same as if we had a 
hundred Vices!” 

“Hear, hear!” cried the Sub-Warden. 

“You seem to think it very remarkable", my Lady 
remarked with some severity, “that your wife should 
speak the truth!” 

“No, not remarkable at all!” her husband anxiously 
explained. “Nothing is remarkable that you say, sweet 
one!" 

My Lady smiled approval of the sentiment, and went 
on. “And am I Vice-Wardeness?” 

“If you choose to use that title," said the Warden: “but 
‘Your Excellency’ will be the proper style of address. And 
I trust that both ‘His Excellency' and ‘Her Excellency' 
will observe the Agreement I have drawn up. The provi¬ 
sion I am most anxious about is this.” He unrolled a large 
parchment scroll, and read aloud the words “ ‘item, that 
we will be kind to the poor’. The Chancellor worded it for 
me,” he added, glancing at that great Functionary. “I 
suppose, now, that word ‘item’ has some deep legal mean¬ 
ing?” 

“Undoubtedly!” replied the Chancellor, as articulately 
as he could with a pen between his lips. He was nervously 
rolling and unrolling several other scrolls, and making 
room among them for the one the Warden had just 
handed to him. “These are merely the rough copies,” he 
explained: “and, as soon as I have put in the final correc¬ 
tions—" making a great commotion among the differ¬ 
ent parchments, “—a semi-colon or two that I have 
accidentally omitted—” here he darted about, pen in 
hand, from one part of the scroll to another, spreading 
sheets of blotting-paper over his corrections, “all will be 
ready for signing.” 

"Should it not be read out, first?” my Lady enquired. 



286 


SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


“No need, no need!” the Sub-Warden and the Chan¬ 
cellor exclaimed at the same moment, with feverish eager¬ 
ness. 

“No need at all,” the Warden gently assented. “Your 
husband and I have gone through it together. It provides 
that he shall exercise the full authority of Warden, and 
shall have the disposal of the annual revenue attached to 
the office, until my return, or, failing that, until Bruno 
comes of age: and that he shall then hand over, to myself 
or to Bruno as the case may be, the Wardenship, the un¬ 
spent revenue, and the contents of the Treasury, which 
are to be preserved, intact, under his guardianship.” 

All this time the Sub-Warden was busy, with the Chan¬ 
cellor’s help, shifting the papers from side to side, and 
pointing out to the Warden the place where he was to 
sign. He then signed it himself, and my Lady and the 
Chancellor added their names as witnesses. 

“Short partings are best,” said the Warden. “All is 
ready for my journey. My children are waiting below to 
see me off.” He gravely kissed my Lady, shook hands 
with his brother and the Chancellor, and left the room. 

The three waited in silence till the sound of wheels an¬ 
nounced that the Warden was out of hearing: then, to my 
surprise, they broke into peals of uncontrollable laughter. 

“What a game, oh, what a game!” cried the Chancellor. 
And he and the Vice Warden joined hands, and skipped 
wildly about the room. My Lady was too dignified to skip, 
but she laughed like the neighing of a horse, and waved 
her handkerchief above her head: it was clear to her very 
limited understanding that something very clever had 
been done, but what it was she had yet to learn. 

“You said I should hear all about it when the Warden 
had gone,” she remarked, as soon as she could make her¬ 
self heard. 

“And so you shall, Tabby!” her husband graciously 
replied, as he removed the blotting paper, and showed the 
two parchments lying side by side. “This is the one he 
read but didn't sign: and this is the one he signed but 



A CUNNING CONSPIRACY 287 

didn’t read! You see it was all covered up, except the 
place for signing the names-” 

"Yes, yes!" my Lady interrupted eagerly, and began 
comparing the two Agreements. “ ‘Item, that he shall ex¬ 
ercise the authority of Warden, in the Warden’s absence.’ 
Why, that’s been changed into ‘shall be absolute governor 
for life, with the title of Emperor, if elected to that office 
by the people.’ What! Are you Emperor, darling?” 

"Not yet, dear,” the Vice-Warden replied. “It wo’n’t do 
to let this paper be seen, just at present. All in good 
time.” 

My Lady nodded, and read on. “ 'Item, that we will be 
kind to the poor.’ Why, that's omitted altogether!” 

"Course it is!” said her husband. " We're not going to 
bother about the wretches!” 

“Good,” said my Lady, with emphasis, and read on 
again. " ‘Item, that the contents of the Treasury be pre¬ 
served intact.’ Why, that’s altered into ‘shall be at the 
absolute disposal of the Vice-Warden’! Well, Sibby, that 
was a clever trick! All the Jewels, only think! May I go 
and put them on directly?” 

"Well, not just yet, Lovey,” her husband uneasily 
replied "You see the public mind isn’t quite ripe for it yet. 
We must feel our way. Of course we’ll have the coach- 
and-four out, at once. And I’ll take the title of Emperor, 
as soon as we can safely hold an Election. But they’ll 
hardly stand our using the Jewels, as long as they know 
the Warden’s alive. We must spread a report of his death. 
A little Conspiracy-” 

"A Conspiracy!” cried the delighted lady, clapping her 
hands. "Of all things, I do like a Conspiracy! It’s so in¬ 
teresting!” 

The Vice-Warden and the Chancellor interchanged a 
wink or two. "Let her conspire to her heart’s content!” 
the cunning Chancellor whispered. “It’ll do no harm!” 

“And when will the Conspiracy-” 

"Hist!” her husband hastily interrupted her, as the 
door opened, and Sylvie and Bruno came in, with their 



288 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

arms twined lovingly round each other—Bruno sobbing 
convulsively, with his face hidden on his sister's shoulder, 
and Sylvie more grave and quiet, but with tears stream¬ 
ing down her cheeks. 

"Mustn't cry like that!” the Vice-Warden said sharply, 
but without any effect on the weeping children. "Cheer 
’em up a bit!” he hinted to my Lady. 

“Cake!” my Lady muttered to herself with great de¬ 
cision, crossing the room and opening a cupboard, from 
which she presently returned with two slices of plum- 
cake. "Eat, ap.d don’t cry!” were her short and simple 
orders: and the poor children sat down side by side, but 
seemed in no mood for eating. 

For the second time the door opened—or rather was 
burst open, this time, as Uggug rushed violently into the 
room, shouting "that old Beggar’s come again!” 

"He’s not to have any food-” the Vice-Warden was 

beginning, but the Chancellor interrupted him. "It's all 
right,” he said, in a low voice: “the servants have their 
orders.” 

"He’s just under here,” said Uggug, who had gone 
to the window, and was looking down into the court¬ 
yard. 

"Where, my darling?” said his fond mother, flinging 
her arms round the neck of the little monster. All of us 
(except Sylvie and Bruno, who took no notice of what 
was going on) followed her to the window. The old Beggar 
looked up at us with hungry eyes. "Only a crust of bread, 
your Highness!” he pleaded. He was a fine old man, but 
looked sadly ill and worn. "A crust of bread is what I 
crave!” he repeated. "A single crust and a little water!” 

"Here’s some water, drink this!” Uggug bellowed, 
emptying a jug of water over his head. 

"Well done, my boy!” cried the Vice-Warden. "That’s 
the way to settle such folk!” 

"Clever boy!” the Wardeness chimed in. “Hasn’t he 
good spirits?” 

“Take a stick to him!” shouted the Vice-Warden, as 



A CUNNING CONSPIRACY 289 

the old Beggar shook the water from his ragged cloak, and 
again gazed meekly upwards. 

“Take a red-hot poker to him!” my Lady again chimed 
in. 

Possibly there was no red-hot poker handy: but some 
sticks were forthcoming in a moment, and threatening 
faces surrounded the poor old wanderer, who waved them 
back with quiet dignity. "No need to break my old 
bones,” he said. “I am going. Not even a crust!” 

“Poor, poor old man!” exclaimed a little voice at my 
side, half choked with sobs. Bruno was at the window, 
trying to throw out his slice of plum-cake, but Sylvie held 
him back. 

“He shall have my cake!” Bruno cried, passionately 
struggling out of Sylvie’s arms. 

“Yes, yes, darling!” Sylvie gently pleaded. “But don’t 
throw it out! He’s gone away, don't you see? Let’s go 
after him.” And she led him out of the room, unnoticed 
by the rest of the party, who were wholly absorbed in 
watching the old Beggar. 

The Conspirators returned to their seats, and continued 
their conversation in an undertone, so as not to be heard 
by Uggug, who was still standing at the window. 

“By the way, there was something about Bruno suc¬ 
ceeding to the Wardenship,” said my Lady. “How does 
that stand in the new Agreement ? ’ ’ 

The Chancellor chuckled. “Just the same, word for 
word,” he said, “with one exception, my Lady. Instead of 
‘Bruno’, I've taken the liberty to put in—” he dropped 
his voice to a whisper, “—to put in ‘Uggug’, you know!” 

"Uggug, indeed!” I exclaimed, in a burst of indigna¬ 
tion I could no longer control. To bring out even that one 
word seemed a gigantic effort: but, the cry once uttered, 
all effort ceased at once: a sudden gust swept away the 
whole scene, and I found myself sitting up, staring at the 
young lady in the opposite corner of the carriage, who had 
now thrown back her veil, and was looking at me with 
an expression of amused surprise. 



Chapter V 


A Beggar’s Palace 

That I had said something, in the act of waking, I felt 
sure: the hoarse stifled cry was still ringing in my ears, 
even if the startled look of my fellow-traveler had not 
been evidence enough: but what could I possibly say by 
way of apology? 

“I hope I didn’t frighten you?” I stammered out at 
last. "I have no idea what I said. I was dreaming.” 

“You said ‘Uggug indeed!' ” the young lady replied, 
with quivering lips that would curve themselves into a 
smile, in spite of all her efforts to look grave. “At least— 
you didn’t say it—you shouted it!” 

“I’m very sorry,” was all I could say, feeling very peni¬ 
tent and helpless. “She has Sylvie’s eyes!” I thought to 
myself, half-doubting whether, even now, I were fairly 
awake. “And that sweet look of innocent wonder is all 
Sylvie’s, too. But Sylvie hasn’t got that calm resolute 
mouth—nor that far-away look of dreamy sadness, like 

one that has had some deep sorrow, very long ago-” 

And the thick-coming fancies almost prevented my hear¬ 
ing the lady's next words. 

“If you had had a ‘Shilling Dreadful’ in your hand,” 
she proceeded, “something about Ghosts—or Dynamite 
—or Midnight Murder—one could understand it: those 
things aren't worth the shilling, unless they give one a 
Nightmare. But really—with only a medical treatise, you 

know-” and she glanced, with a pretty shrug of 

contempt, at the book over which I had fallen asleep. 

Her friendliness, and utter unreserve, took me aback 
for a moment; yet there was no touch of forwardness, or 
boldness, about the child—for child, almost, she seemed 
to be: I guessed her at scarcely over twenty—all was the 
innocent frankness of some angelic visitant, new to the 
ways of earth and the conventionalisms—or, if you will, 

290 



A beggar’s palace 


291 

the barbarisms—of Society. “Even so”, I mused, “will 
Sylvie look and speak, in another ten years.” 

“You don’t care for Ghosts, then,” I ventured to sug¬ 
gest, “unless they are really terrifying?” 

“Quite so,” the lady assented. “The regular Railway- 
Ghosts—I mean the Ghosts of ordinary Railway- 
literature—are very poor affairs. I feel inclined to say, 
with Alexander Selkirk, ‘Their tameness is shocking to 
me’! And they never do any Midnight Murders. They 
couldn’t ‘welter in gore’, to save their lives!” 

“ ‘Weltering in gore’ is a very expressive phrase, cer¬ 
tainly. Can it be done in any fluid, I wonder?” 

“I think not," the lady readily replied—quite as if she 
had thought it out, long ago. “It has to be something 
thick. For instance, you might welter in bread-sauce. 
That, being white, would be more suitable for a Ghost, 
supposing it wished to welter!” 

“You have a real good terrifying Ghost in that book?” 
I hinted. 

“How could you guess?” she exclaimed with the most 
engaging frankness, and placed the volume in my hands. 
I opened it eagerly, with a not unpleasant thrill (like 
what a good ghost-story gives one) at the “uncanny” 
coincidence of my having so unexpectedly divined the 
subject of her studies. 

It was a book of Domestic Cookery, open at the article 
"Bread Sauce”. 

I returned the book, looking, I suppose, a little blank, 
as the lady laughed merrily at my discomfiture. “It’s far 
more exciting than some of the modern ghosts, I assure 
you! Now there was a Ghost last month—I don’t mean 
a real Ghost in—in Supernature—but in a Magazine. It 
was a perfectly flavourless Ghost. It wouldn’t have fright¬ 
ened a mouse! It wasn’t a Ghost that one would even 
offer a chair to!” 

“Three score years and ten, baldness, and spectacles, 
have their advantages after all!” I said to myself. “In¬ 
stead of a bashful youth and maiden, gasping out mono- 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


292 

syllables at awful intervals, here we have an old man and 
a child, quite at their ease, talking as if they had known 
each other for years! Then you think”, I continued aloud, 
“that we ought sometimes to ask a Ghost to sit down? 
But have we any authority for it? In Shakespeare, for 
instance—there are plenty of ghosts there —does Shake¬ 
speare ever give the stage-direction ‘hands chair to 
Ghost’}” 

The lady looked puzzled and thoughtful for a moment: 
then she almost clapped her hands. “Yes, yes, he doesY’ 
she cried. "He makes Hamlet say 'Rest, rest, perturbed 
Spirit!’ ” 

“And that, I suppose, means an easy-chair?” 

“An American rocking-chair, I think -” 

“Fayfield Junction, my Lady, change for Elveston!” 
the guard announced, flinging open the door of the car¬ 
riage: and we soon found ourselves, with all our portable 
property around us, on the platform. 

The accommodation, provided for passengers waiting 
at this Junction, was distinctly inadequate—a single 
wooden bench, apparently intended for three sitters only: 
and even this was already partially occupied by a very 
old man, in a smock frock, who sat, with rounded shoul¬ 
ders and drooping head, and with hands clasped on the 
top of his stick so as to make a sort of pillow for that 
wrinkled face with its look of patient weariness. 

“Come, you be off!” the Station-master roughly ac¬ 
costed the poor old man. “You be off, and make way for 
your betters! This way, my Lady!” he added in a per¬ 
fectly different tone. “If your Ladyship will take a seat, 
the train will be up in a few minutes.” The cringing 
servility of his manner was due, no doubt, to the address 
legible on . the pile of luggage, which announced their 
owner to be “Lady Muriel Orme, passenger to Elveston, 
via Fayfield Junction”. 

As I watched the old man slowly rise to his feet, and 
hobble a few paces down the platform, the lines came 
to my lips: 



A beggar's palace 


293 


“From sackcloth couch the Monk arose, 

With toil his stiffen’d limbs he rear’d; 

A hundred years had flung their snows 
On his thin locks and floating beard.” 

But the lady scarcely noticed the little incident. After 
one glance at the "banished man” who stood tremulously 
leaning on his stick, she turned to me. "This is not an 
American rocking-chair, by any means! Yet may I say,” 
slightly changing her place, so as to make room for me 
beside her, "may I say, in Hamlet's words, ‘Rest, rest 
-' ” she broke off with a silvery laugh. 

" ‘—perturbed Spirit!' ” I finished the sentence for her. 
"Yes, that describes a railway-traveler exactlyl And here 
is an instance of it,” I added, as the tiny local train drew 
up alongside the platform, and the porters bustled about, 
opening carriage-doors—one of them helping the poor 
old man to hoist himself into a third-class carriage, while 
another of them obsequiously conducted the lady and 
myself into a first-class. 

She paused, before following him, to watch the progress 
of the other passenger. "Poor old man!” she said. "How 
weak and ill he looks! It was a shame to let him be 

turned away like that. I'm very sorry-” At this 

moment it dawned on me that these words were not 
addressed to me, but that she was unconsciously thinking 
aloud. I moved away a few steps, and waited to follow 
her into the carriage, where I resumed the conversation. 

"Shakespeare must have traveled by rail, if only in a 
dream: ‘perturbed Spirit’ is such a happy phrase.” 

" ‘Perturbed’ referring, no doubt,” she rejoined, "to 
the sensational booklets, peculiar to the Rail. If Steam 
has done nothing else, it has at least added a whole new 
Species of English Literature!” 

"No doubt of it,” I echoed. "The true origin of all our 
medical books—and all our cookery-books-" 

"No, no!” she broke in merrily. “I didn’t mean our 
Literature! We are quite abnormal. But the booklets— 
the little thrilling romances, where the Murder comes at 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


294 

page fifteen, and the Wedding at page forty—surely they 
are due to Steam?” 

“And when we travel by Electricity—if I may venture 
to develop your theory—we shall have leaflets instead of 
booklets, and the Murder and the Wedding will come on 
the same page.” 

“A development worthy of Darwin!” the lady exclaim¬ 
ed enthusiastically. “Onl yyou reverse his theory. Instead 
of developing a mouse into an elephant, you would de¬ 
velop an elephant into a mouse!” But here we plunged 
into a tunnel, and I leaned back and closed my eyes for 
a moment, trying to recall a few of the incidents of my 
recent dream. 

“I thought I saw-” I murmured sleepily: and then 

the phrase insisted on conjugating itself, and ran into 

“you thought you saw—he thought he saw-” and 

then it suddenly went off into a song: 

“He thought he saw an Elephant, 

That practised on a fife: 

He looked again, and found it was 
A letter from his wife. 

‘At length I realise', he said, 

‘ The bitterness of Life!' ” 

And what a wild being it was who sang these wild 
words! A Gardener he seemed to be—yet surely a mad 
one, by the way he brandished his rake—madder, by the 
way he broke, ever and anon, into a frantic jig—maddest 
of all, by the shriek in which he brought out the last 
words of the stanza! 

It was so far a description of himself that he had the 
feet of an Elephant: but the rest of him was skin and 
bone: and the wisps of loose straw, that bristled all about 
him, suggested that he had been originally stuffed with 
it, and that nearly all the stuffing had come out. 

Sylvie and Bruno waited patiently till the end of the 
first verse. Then Sylvie advanced alone (Bruno having 



A beggar's palace 


295 

suddenly turned shy) and timidly introduced herself 
with the words “Please, I’m Sylvie!” 

“And who's that other thing?” said the Gardener. 

“What thing?” said Sylvie, looking round. “Oh, that’s 
Bruno. He’s my brother.” 

“Was he your brother yesterday?” the Gardener 
anxiously enquired. 

“Course I were!” cried Bruno, who had gradually crept 
nearer, and didn’t at all like being talked about without 
having his share in the conversation. 

"Ah, well!” the Gardener said with a kind of groan. 
"Things change so, here. Whenever I look again it’s sure 
to be something different! Yet I does my duty! I gets up 
wriggle-early at five-” 

“If I was 00,” said Bruno, “I wouldn't wriggle so early. 
It’s as bad as being a worm!” he added, in an undertone 
to Sylvie. 

“But you shouldn’t be lazy in the morning, Bruno,” 
said Sylvie. "Remember, it’s the early bird that picks up 
the worm!” 

“It may, if it likes!” Bruno said with a slight yawn. 
"I don’t like eating worms, one bit. I always stop in bed 
till the early bird has picked them up!” 

"I wonder you’ve the face to tell me such fibs!” cried 
the Gardener. 

To which Bruno wisely replied, “Oo don’t want a face 
to tell fibs wiz—only a mouf” 

Sylvie discreetly changed the subject. “And did you 
plant all these flowers?” she said. “What a lovely garden 
you’ve made! Do you know, I’d like to live here alwaysl” 

“In the winter-nights-” the Gardener was begin¬ 

ning. 

“But I’d nearly forgotten what we came about!” Sylvie 
interrupted. “Would you please let us through into the 
road? There's a poor old beggar just gone out—and he’s 
very hungry—and Bruno wants to give him his cake, 
you know!” 

“It’s as much as my place is worth!” the Gardener 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


296 

muttered, taking a key from his pocket, and beginning to 
unlock a door in the garden-wall. 

"How much are it wurf?” Bruno innocently enquired. 

But the Gardener only grinned. “That's a secret!" he 
said. "Mind you come back quick!” he called after the 
children, as they passed out into the road. I had just time 
to follow them, before he shut the door again. 

We hurried down the road, and very soon caught sight 
of the old Beggar, about a quarter of a mile ahead of us, 
and the children at once set off running to overtake him. 
Lightly and swiftly they skimmed over the ground, and 
I could not in the least understand how it was I kept up 
with them so easily. But the unsolved problem did not 
worry me so much as at another time it might have done, 
there were so many other things to attend to. 

The old Beggar must have been very deaf, as he paid 
no attention whatever to Bruno's eager shouting, but 
trudged wearily on, never pausing until the child got in 
front of him and held up the slice of cake. The poor 
little fellow was quite out of breath, and could only utter 
the one word "Cake!”—not with the gloomy decision 
with which Her Excellency had so lately pronounced it, 
but with a sweet childish timidity, looking up into the 
old man’s face with eyes that loved “all things both great 
and small”. 

The old man snatched it from him, and devoured it 
greedily, as some hungry wild beast might have done, 
but never a word of thanks did he give his little bene¬ 
factor—only growled “More, more!” and glared at the 
half-frightened children. 

“There is no more!” Sylvie said with tears in her eyes. 
“I’d eaten mine. It was a shame to let you be turned 
away like that. I’m very sorry-” 

I lost the rest of the sentence, for my mind had re¬ 
curred, with a great shock of surprise, to Lady Muriel 
Orme, who had so lately uttered these very words of 
Sylvie’s—yes, and in Sylvie’s own voice, and with 
Sylvie’s gentle pleading eyes! 



A BEGGAR'S PALACE 3^7 

“Follow me!” were the next words I heard, as the old 
man waved his hand, with a dignified grace that ill 
suited his ragged dress, over a bush, that stood by the 
road side, which began instantly to sink into the earth. 
At another time I might have doubted the evidence of 
my eyes, or at least have felt some astonishment: but, in 
this strange scene, my whole being seemed absorbed in 
strong curiosity as to what would happen next. 

When the bush had sunk quite out of our sight, marble 
steps were seen, leading downwards into darkness. The 
old man led the way, and we eagerly followed. 

The staircase was so dark, at first, that I could only 
just see the forms of the children as, hand-in-hand, they 
groped their way down after their guide: but it got 
lighter every moment, with a strange silvery brightness, 
that seemed to exist in the air, as there were no lamps 
visible; and, when at last we reached a level floor, the 
room, we found ourselves in, was almost as light as 
day. 

It was eight-sided, having in each angle a slender pillar, 
round which silken draperies were twined. The wall be¬ 
tween the pillars was entirely covered, to the height of 
six or seven feet, with creepers, from which hung quan¬ 
tities of ripe fruit and of brilliant flowers, that almost hid 
the leaves. In another place, perchance, I might have 
wondered to see fruit and flowers growing together: here, 
my chief wonder was that neither fruit nor flowers were 
such as I had ever seen before. Higher up, each wall con¬ 
tained a circular window of coloured glass; and over all 
was an arched roof, that seemed to be spangled all over 
with jewels. 

With hardly less wonder, I turned this way and that, 
trying to make out how in the world we had come in: 
for there was no door: and all the walls were thickly cov¬ 
ered with the lovely creepers. 

“We are safe here, my darlings!” said the old man, 
laying a hand on Sylvie’s shoulder, and bending down to 
kiss her. Sylvie drew back hastily, with an offended air: 



298 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

but in another moment, with a glad cry of “Why, it’s 
Father]", she had run into his arms. 

“Father! Father!’’ Bruno repeated: and, while the 
happy children were being hugged and kissed, I could 
but rub my eyes and say “Where, then, are the rags gone 
to?”; for the old man was now dressed in royal robes 
that glittered with jewels and gold embroidery, and wore 
a circlet of gold around his head. 


Chapter VI 
The Magic Locket 

“Where are we, father?” Sylvie whispered, with her 
arms twined closely around the old man’s neck, and with 
her rosy cheek lovingly pressed to his. 

“In Elfland, darling. It’s one of the provinces of Fairy¬ 
land.” 

“But I thought Elfland was ever so far from Outland: 
and we’ve come such a tiny little way!” 

“You came by the Royal Road, sweet one. Only those 
of royal blood can travel along it: but you’ve been royal 
ever since I was made King of Elfland—that’s nearly a 
month ago. They sent two ambassadors, to make sure 
that their invitation to me, to be their new King, should 
reach me. One was a Prince; so he was able to come by 
the Royal Road, and to come invisibly to all but me: the 
other was a Baron; so he had to come by the common 
road, and I dare say he hasn’t even arrived yet.” 

"Then how far have we come?” Sylvie enquired. 

“Just a thousand miles, sweet one, since the Gardener 
unlocked that door for you.” 

"A thousand miles!” Bruno repeated. “And may I eat 
one?” 

“Eat a mile, little rogue?” 



THE MAGIC LOCKET 299 

“No,” said Bruno. “I mean may I eat one of that 
fruits?” 

“Yes, child,” said the father: “and then you’ll find out 
what Pleasure is like—the Pleasure we all seek so madly, 
and enjoy so mournfully!” 

Bruno ran eagerly to the wall, and picked a fruit that 
was shaped something like a banana, but had the colour 
of a strawberry. 

He ate it with beaming looks, that became gradually 
more gloomy, and were very blank indeed by the time 
he had finished. 

“It hasn’t got no taste at all!” he complained. “I 
couldn’t feel nuffin in my mouf! It’s a—what’s that hard 
word, Sylvie?” 

“It was a Phlizz,” Sylvie gravely replied. “Are they all 
like that, father?” 

“They’re all like that to you, darling, because you don’t 
belong to Elfland—yet. But to me they are real.” 

Bruno looked puzzled. “I’ll try anuvver kind of 
fruits!” he said, and jumped down off the King’s knee. 
“There’s some lovely striped ones, just like a rainbow!” 
And off he ran. 

Meanwhile the Fairy-King and Sylvie were talking 
together, but in such low tones that I could not catch the 
words: so I followed Bruno, who was picking and eating 
other kinds of fruit, in the vain hope of finding some 
that had a taste. I tried to pick some myself—but it was 
like grasping air, and I soon gave up the attempt and 
returned to Sylvie. 

“Look well at it, my darling,” the old man was saying, 
“and tell me how you like it.” 

"It’s just lovely,” cried Sylvie delightedly. “Bruno, 
come and look!” And she held up, so that he might see 
the light through it, a heart-shaped Locket, apparently 
cut out of a single jewel, of a rich blue colour, with a 
slender gold chain attached to it. 

“It are welly pretty,” Bruno more soberly remarked: 
and he began spelling out some words inscribed on it. 



300 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

“All—will—love—Sylvie,” he made them out at last. 
“And so they doos!” he cried, clasping his arms round 
her neck. “Everybody loves Sylvie!” 

“But we love her best, don’t we, Bruno?” said the old 
King, as he took possession of the Locket. “Now, Sylvie, 
look at this.” And he showed her, lying on the palm of 
his hand, a Locket of a deep crimson colour, the same 
shape as the blue one, and, like it, attached to a slender 
golden chain. 

“Lovelier and lovelier!” exclaimed Sylvie, clasping her 
hands in ecstasy. “Look, Bruno!” 

“And there's words on this one, too,” said Bruno. 
“Sylvie—will—love—all.” 

“Now you see the difference,” said the old man: “dif¬ 
ferent colours and different words. Choose one of them, 
darling. I’ll give you whichever you like best.” 

Sylvie whispered the words, several times over, with a 
thoughtful smile, and then made her decision. “It’s very 
nice to be loved,” she said: "but it’s nicer to love other 
people! May I have the red one, Father?” 

The old man said nothing: but I could see his eyes fill 
with tears, as he bent his head and pressed his lips to her 
forehead in a long loving kiss. Then he undid the chain, 
and showed her how to fasten it round her neck, and to 
hide it away under the edge of her frock. “It's for you to 
keep, you know,” he said in a low voice, "not for other 
people to see. You’ll remember how to use it?” 

“Yes, I’ll remember,” said Sylvie. 

“And now, darlings, it's time for you to go back, or 
they’ll be missing you, and then that poor Gardener will 
get into trouble!” 

Once more a feeling of wonder rose in my mind as to 
how in the world we were to get back again—since I 
took it for granted that wherever the children went, I 
was to go—but no shadow of doubt seemed to cross their 
minds, as they hugged and kissed him, murmuring, over 
and over again, "Good-bye, darling Father!” And then, 
suddenly and swiftly, the darkness of midnight seemed 



THE MAGIC LOCKET 301 

to close in upon us, and through the darkness harshly 
rang a strange wild song: 

“He thought he saw a Buffalo 
Upon the chimney-piece: 

He looked again, and found it was 
His Sister’s Husband's Niece. 

'Unlessyou leave this house’, he said, 

‘I’ll send for the Police!' ” 

“That was me I” he added, looking out at us, through 
the half-opened door, as we stood waiting in the road. 
“And that's what I’d have done—as sure as potatoes 
aren’t radishes—if she hadn’t have tooken herself off! 
But I always loves my pay-rints like anything.’’ 

“Who are oor pay-rintsV’ said Bruno. 

“Them as pay rint for me, of course!’’ the Gardener 
replied. “You can come in now, if you like." 

He flung the door open as he spoke, and we got out, 
a little dazzled and stupefied (at least I felt so) at the 
sudden transition from the half-darkness of the railway- 
carriage to the brilliantly-lighted platform of Elveston 
Station. 

A footman, in a handsome livery, came forward and 
respectfully touched his hat. “The carriage is here, my 
Lady,” he said, taking from her the wraps and small 
v articles she was carrying: and Lady Muriel, after shaking 
hands and bidding me “Good-night!” with a pleasant 
smile, followed him. 

It was with a somewhat blank and lonely feeling that 
I betook myself to the van from which the luggage was 
being taken out: and, after giving directions to have my 
boxes sent after me, I made my way on foot to Arthur’s 
lodgings, and soon lost my lonely feeling in the hearty 
welcome my old friend gave me, and the cosy warmth 
and cheerful light of the little sitting-room into which 
he led me. 

“Little, as you see, but quite enough for us two. Now, 
take the easy-chair, old fellow, and let's have another 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


302 

look at you! Well, you do look a bit pulled down!” and he 
put on a solemn professional air. "I prescribe Ozone, 
quant, suff. Social dissipation, jiant pilules quam plurimcs: 
to be taken, feasting, three times a day!” 

“But, Doctor!” I remonstrated. “Society doesn't 
‘receive' three times a day!” 

"That's all you know about it!” the young Doctor 
gaily replied. "At home, lawn-tennis, 3 p.m. At home, 
kettledrum, 5 p.m. At home, music (Elveston doesn't give 
dinners), 8 p.m. Carriages at 10. There you are!” 

It sounded very pleasant, I was obliged to admit. "And 
I know some of the lady -society already,” I added. "One 
of them came in the same carriage with me.” 

"What was she like? Then perhaps I can identify her.” 

"The name was Lady Muriel Orme. As to what she 
was like —well, I thought her very beautiful. Do you 
know her?” 

"Yes—I do know her.” And the grave Doctor coloured 
slightly as he added "Yes, I agree with you. She is 
beautiful." 

"/ quite lost my heart to her!” I went on mischiev¬ 
ously. "We talked-” 

"Have some supper!” Arthur interrupted with an air 
of relief, as the maid entered with the tray. And he stead¬ 
ily resisted all my attempts to return to the subject of 
Lad)? Muriel until the evening had almost worn itself 
away. Then, as we sat gazing into the fire, and conversa¬ 
tion was lapsing into silence, he made a hurried con¬ 
fession. 

"I hadn't meant to tell you anything about her”, he 
said (naming no names, as if there were only one "she” 
in the world!) "till you had seen more of her, and formed 
your own judgment of her: but somehow you surprised 
it out of me. And I’ve not breathed a word of it to any 
one else. But I can trust you with a secret, old friend! 
Yes! It’s true of me, what I suppose you said in jest.” 

"In the merest jest, believe me!” I said earnestly. 
"Why, man, I’m three times her age! But if she’s 



THE MAGIC LOCKET 303 

your choice, then I’m sure she’s all that is good and—” 
"—and sweet,” Arthur went on, “and pure, and self- 

denying, and true-hearted, and-he broke off hastily, 

as if he could not trust himself to say more on a subject 
so sacred and so precious. Silence followed: and I leaned 
back drowsily in my easy-chair, filled with bright and 
beautiful imaginings of Arthur and his lady-love, and of 
all the peace and happiness in store for them. 

I picture^ them to myself walking together, lingeringly 
and lovingly, under arching tre.e^ in a sweet garden of 
their own, and welcomed back by their faithful gardener, 
on their return from some brief excursion. 

It seemed natural enough that the gardener should be 
filled with exuberant delight at the return of so gracious 
a master and mistress—and how strangely childlike they 
looked! I could have taken them for Sylvie and Bruno 
—less natural that he should show it by such wild dances, 
such crazy songs! 

"He thought he saw a Rattlesnake 
That questioned him in Greek: 

He looked again, and found it was 
The Middle of Next Week. 

‘The one thing I regret’, he said, 

‘Is that it cannot speak!’ ” 

—least natural of all that the Vice-Warden and "my 
Lady” should be standing close beside me, discussing an 
open letter, which had just been handed to him by the 
Professor, who stood, meekly waiting, a few yards off. 

“If it were not for those two brats”, I heard him mut¬ 
ter, glancing savagely at Sylvie and Bruno, who were 
courteously listening to the Gardener’s song, "there 
would be no difficulty whatever.” 

"Let's hear that bit of the letter again,” said my Lady. 
And the Vice-Warden read aloud: 

"—and we therefore entreat you graciously to accept 
the Kingship, to which you have been unanimously elect¬ 
ed by the Council of Elfland: and that you will allow 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


304 

your son Bruno—of whose goodness, cleverness, and 
beauty, reports have reached us—to be regarded as Heir- 
Apparent.” 

“But what's the difficulty?” said my Lady. 

“Why, don't you see? The Ambassador, that brought 
this, is waiting in the house: and he’s sure to see Sylvie 
and Bruno: and then, when he sees Uggug, and remem¬ 
bers all that about ‘goodness, cleverness, and beauty,’ 
why, he’s sure to-” 

“And where will you find a better boy than Uggug?” 
my Lady indignantly interrupted. “Or a wittier, or a 
lovelier?” 

To all of which the Vice-Warden simply replied “Don’t 
you be a great blethering goose! Our only chance is to 
keep those two brats out of sight. If you can manage that, 
you may leave the rest to me. I’ll make him believe Uggug 
to be a model of cleverness and all that.” 

“We must change his name to Bruno, of course?” said 
my Lady. 

The Vice-Warden rubbed his chin. "Humph! No!” he 
said musingly. “Wouldn’t do. The boy’s such an utter 
idiot, he’d never learn to answer to it.” 

“Idiot, indeed!” cried my Lady. “He’s no more an idiot 
than/ am!” 

“You’re right, my dear,” the Vice-Warden soothingly 
replied. “He isn’t, indeed!” 

My Lady was appeased. "Let’s go in and receive the 
Ambassador,” she said, and beckoned to the Professor. 
“Which room is he waiting in?” she inquired. 

“In the Library, Madam.” 

“And what did you say his name was?” said the Vice- 
Warden. 

The Professor referred to a card he held in his hand. 
“His Adiposity the Baron Doppelgeist.” 

"Why does he come with such a funny name?” said 
my Lady. 

"He couldn’t well change it on the journey,” the Pro¬ 
fessor meekly replied, "because of the luggage.” 



THE BARON'S EMBASSY 305 

"You go and receive him”, my Lady said to the Vice- 
Warden, “and I’ll attend to the children.” 


Chapter VII 
The Baron’s Embassy 

I was following the Vice-Warden, but, on second 
thoughts, went after my Lady, being curious to see how 
she would manage to keep the children out of sight. 

I found her holding Sylvie’s hand, and with her other 
hand stroking Bruno’s hair in a most tender and motherly 
fashion: both children were looking bewildered and half- 
frightened. 

“My own darlings,” she was saying, “I've been plan¬ 
ning a little treat for you! The Professor shall take you a 
long walk into the woods this beautiful evening: and you 
shall take a basket of food with you, and have a little 
picnic down by the river!” 

Bruno jumped, and clapped his hands. "That are nice!” 
he cried. “Aren’t it, Sylvie?” 

Sylvie, who hadn’t quite lost her surprised look, put up 
her mouth for a kiss. “Thank you very much,” she said 
earnestly. 

My Lady turned her head away to conceal the broad 
grin of triumph that spread over her vast face, like a 
ripple on a lake. “Little ^implefops! ’ she muttered to her¬ 
self, as she marched up to tl^hpuse. I followed her in. 

“Quite so, your Excellency,” the Baron was saying as 
we entered the Library. “All the infantry were under my 
command.” He turned, and was duly presented to my 
Lady. 

“A military hero?” said my Lady. The fat little man 
simpered. “Well, yes,” he replied, modestly casting down 
his eyes. "My ancestors were all famous for military 
genius.” 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


306 

My Lady smiled graciously. “It often runs in families,” 
she remarked: "just as a love for pastry does.” 

The Baron looked slightly offended, and the Vice- 
Warden discreetly changed the subject. “Dinner will 
soon be ready,” he said. “May I have the honour of con¬ 
ducting your Adiposity to the guest-chamber?” 

“Certainly, certainly!” the Baron eagerly assented. “It 
would never do to keep dinner waiting!” And he almost 
trotted out of the room after the Vice-Warden. 

He was back again so speedily that the Vice-Warden 
had barely time to explain to my Lady that her remark 
about "a love for pastry” was “unfortunate. You might 
have seen, with half an eye,” he added, “that that’s his 
line. Military genius, indeed! Pooh!” 

“Dinner ready yet?” the Baron enquired, as he hurried 
into the room. 

“Will be in a few minutes,” the Vice-Warden replied. 
“Meanwhile, let’s take a turn in the garden. You were 
telling me,” he continued, as the trio left the house, 
“something about a great battle in which you had the 
command of the infantry-” 

“True,” said the Baron. “The enemy, as I was saying, 
far outnumbered us: but I marched my men right into 
the middle of—what’s that?” the Military Hero ex¬ 
claimed in agitated tones, drawing back behind the Vice- 
Warden, as a strange creature rushed wildly upon them, 
brandishing a spade. 

“It’s only the Gardener!” the Vice-Warden replied in 
an encouraging tone. "Quite harmless, I assure you. 
Hark, he’s singing! It's his favourite amusement.” 

And once more those shrill discordant tones rang 
out: 

"He thought he saw a Banker’s Clerk 
Descending from the bus: 

He looked again, and found it was 
A Hippopotamus: 

'If this should stay to dine’, he said, 

'There wo’n’t be much for us!’ ” 



THE BARON’S EMBASSY 


307 

Throwing away the spade, he broke into a frantic jig, 
snapping his fingers, and repeating, again and again 

“There wo’n’t be much for us! 

There wo’n’t be much for us!’’ 

Once more the Baron looked slightly offended, but 
the Vice-Warden hastily explained that the song had no 
allusion to him, and in fact had no meaning at all. “You 
didn’t mean anything by it, now did you?” He appealed 
to the Gardener, who had finished his song, and stood, 
balancing himself on one leg, and looking at them, with 
his mouth open. 

“I never means nothing,” said the Gardener: and Ug- 
gug luckily came up at the moment, and gave the con¬ 
versation a new turn. 

“Allow me to present my son,” said the Vice-Warden; 
adding, in a whisper, "one of the best and cleverest boys 
that ever lived! I’ll contrive for you to see some of his 
cleverness. He knows everything that other boys don’t 
know; and in archery, in fishing, in painting, and in 
music, his skill is—but you shall judge for yourself. You 
see that target over there? He shall shoot an arrow at it. 
Dear boy,” he went on aloud, “his Adiposity would like 
to see you shoot. Bring his Highness’ bow and arrows!” 

Uggug looked very sulky as he received the bow and 
arrow, and prepared to shoot. Just as the arrow left the 
bow, the Vice-Warden trod heavily on the toe of the 
Baron, who yelled with the pain. 

“Ten thousand pardons!” he exclaimed. “I stepped 
back in my excitement. See! It is a bull’s-eye!” 

The Baron gazed in astonishment. “He held the bow 
so awkwardly, it seemed impossible!” he muttered. But 
there was no room for doubt: there was the arrow, right 
in the centre of the bull’s-eye! 

“The lake is close by,” continued the Vice-Warden. 
“Bring his Highness’ fishing-rod!” And Uggug most un¬ 
willingly held the rod, and dangled the fly over the water. 

"A beetle on your arm!” cried my Lady, pinching the 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


308 

poor Baron’s arm worse than if ten lobsters had seized 
it at once. “That kind is poisonous,” she explained. “But 
what a pity! You missed seeing the fish pulled out!” 

An enormous dead cod-fish was lying on the bank, with 
the hook in its mouth. 

“I had always fancied”, the Baron faltered, "that cod 
were salt -water fish?” 

"Not in this country,” said the Vice-Warden. "Shall 
we go in? Ask my son some question on the way —any 
subject you like!” And the sulky boy was violently 
shoved forwards to walk at the Baron’s side. 

"Could your Highness tell me”, the Baron cautiously 
began, "how much seven times nine would come to?” 

“Turn to the left!” cried the Vice-War den, hastily step¬ 
ping forwards to show the way—so hastily, that he ran 
against his unfortunate guest, who fell heavily on his face. 

“So sorry!” my Lady exclaimed, as she and her hus¬ 
band helped him to his feet again. "My son was in the act 
of saying ‘sixty-three’ as you fell!” 

The Baron said nothing: he was covered with dust, 
and seemed much hurt, both in body and mind. However, 
when they had got him into the house, and given him a 
good brushing, matters looked a little better. 

Dinner was served in due course, and every fresh dish 
seemed to increase the good-humour of the Baron: but 
all efforts, to get him to express his opinion as to Uggug's 
cleverness, were in vain, until that interesting youth had 
left the room, and was seen from the open window, 
prowling about the lawn with a little basket, which he 
was filling with frogs. 

"So fond of Natural History as he is, dear boy!” said 
the doting mother. "Now do tell us, Baron, what you 
think of him!” 

"To be perfectly candid,” said the cautious Baron, "I 
would like a little more evidence. I think you mentioned 
his skill in—” 

"Music?” said the Vice-Warden. “Why, he’s simply a 
prodigy! You shall hear him play the piano.” And he 



THE BARON’S EMBASSY 


309 

walked to the window. “Ug—I mean my boy! Come in 
for a minute, and bring the music-master with you l To turn 
over the music for him,” he added as an explanation. 

Uggug, having filled his basket with frogs, had no ob¬ 
jection to obey, and soon appeared in the room, followed 
by a fierce-looking little man, who asked the Vice- 
Warden ‘‘Vot music vill you haf ?” 

“The Sonata that His Highness plays so charmingly,” 
said the Vice-Warden. 

“His Highness haf not—” the music-master began, but 
was sharply stopped by the Vice-Warden. 

“Silence, Sir! Go and turn over the music for His High¬ 
ness. My dear,” (to the Wardeness) “will you show him 
what to do? And meanwhile, Baron, I'll just show you 
a most interesting map we have—of Outland, and Fairy¬ 
land, and that sort of thing.” 

By the time my Lady had returned from explaining 
things to the music-master, the map had been hung up, 
and the Baron was already much bewildered by the Vice- 
Warden’s habit of pointing to one place while he shouted 
out the name of another. 

My Lady joining in, pointing out other places, and 
shouting other names, only made matters worse; and at 
last the Baron, in despair, took to pointing out places 
for himself, and feebly asked “Is that great yellow splotch 
Fairyland ?” 

“Yes, that’s Fairyland,” said the Vice-Warden: “and 
you might as well give him a hint,” he muttered to my 
Lady, “about going back to-morrow. He eats like a shark! 
It would hardly do for me to mention it.” 

His wife caught the idea, and at once began giving 
hints of the most subtle and delicate kind. “Just see what 
a short way it is back to Fairyland! Why, if you started 
to-morrow morning, you'd get there in very little more 
than a week!” 

The Baron looked incredulous. “It took me a full 
month to come,” he said. 

“But it's ever so much shorter, going back, you know!” 



310 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

The Baron looked appealingly to the Vice-Warden, 
who chimed in readily. “You can go back five times, in 
the time it took you to come here once —if you start to¬ 
morrow morning!' ’ 

All this time the Sonata was pealing through the room. 
The Baron could not help admitting to himself that it 
was being magnificently played: but he tried in vain to 
get a glimpse of the youthful performer. Every time he 
had nearly succeeded in catching sight of him, either the 
Vice-Warden or his wife was sure to get in the way, 
pointing out some new place on the map, and deafening 
him with some new name. 

He gave in at last, wished a hasty good-night, and left 
the room, while his host and hostess interchanged looks 
of triumph. 

“Deftly done!” cried the Vice-Warden. “Craftily con¬ 
trived! But what means all that tramping on the stairs?” 
He half-opened the door, looked out, and added in a tone 
of dismay, “The Baron’s boxes are being carried down!” 

“And what means all that rumbling of wheels?” cried 
my Lady. She peeped through the wandow curtains. “The 
Baron’s carriage has come round!” she groaned. 

At this moment the door opened: a fat, furious face 
looked in: a voice, hoarse with passion, thundered out 
the words “My room is full of frogs—I leave you!” and 
the door closed again. 

And still the noble Sonata went pealing through the 
room: but it was Arthur's masterly touch that roused the 
echoes, and thrilled my very soul with the tender music 
of the immortal “Sonata Pathetique”: and it was not till 
the last note had died away that the tired but happy 
traveler could bring himself to utter the words “good¬ 
night!” and to seek his much-needed pillow. 



Chapter VIII 


A Ride on a Lion 

The next day glided away, pleasantly enough, partly in 
settling myself in my new quarters, and partly in strolling 
round the neighbourhood, under Arthur’s guidance, 
and trying to form a general idea of Elveston and its in¬ 
habitants. When five o’clock arrived, Arthur proposed— 
without any embarrassment this time—to take me with 
him up to "the Hall”, in order that I might make ac¬ 
quaintance with the Earl of Ainslie, who had taken it for 
the season, and renew acquaintance with his daughter 
Lady Muriel. 

My first impressions of the gentle, dignified, and yet 
genial old man were entirely favourable: and the real 
satisfaction that showed itself on his daughter’s face, as 
she met me with the words "this is indeed an unlooked- 
for pleasure!”, was very soothing for whatever remains of 
personal vanity the failures and disappointments of many 
long years, and much buffeting with a rough world, had 
left in me. 

Yet I noted, and was glad to note, evidence of a far 
deeper feeling than mere friendly regard, in her meeting 
with Arthur—though this was, as I gathered, an almost 
daily occurrence—and the conversation between them, in 
which the Earl and I were only occasional sharers, had 
an ease and a spontaneity rarely met with except between 
very old friends: and, as I knew that they had not known 
each other for a longer period than the summer which 
was now rounding into autumn, I felt certain that "Love”, 
and Love alone, could explain the phenomenon. 

“How convenient it would be”, Lady Muriel laughingly 
remarked, a propos of my having insisted on saving her 
the trouble of carrying a cup of tea across the room to 
the Earl, “if cups of tea had no weight at all! Then per¬ 
haps ladies would sometimes be permitted to carry them 
for short distances!” 


3 ” 



312 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

"One can easily imagine a situation", said Arthur, 
"where things would necessarily have no weight, rela¬ 
tively to each other, though each would have its usual 
weight, looked at by itself." 

"Some desperate paradox!" said the Earl. "Tell us how 
it could be. We shall never guess it." 

"Well, suppose this house, just as it is, placed a few 
billion miles above a planet, and with nothing else near 
enough to disturb it: of course it falls to the planet?” 

The Earl nodded. "Of course—though it might take 
some centuries to do it." 

"And is five-o'clock-tea to be going on all the while?” 
said Lady Muriel. 

"That, and other things,” said Arthur. "The inhabi¬ 
tants would live their lives, grow up and die, and still 
the house would be falling, falling, falling! But now as to 
the relative weight of things. Nothing can be heavy, you 
know, except by trying to fall, and being prevented from 
doing so. You all grant that?” 

We all granted that. 

“Well, now, if I take this book, and hold it out at 
arm’s length, of course I feel its weight. It is trying to fall, 
and I prevent it. And, if I let go, it falls to the floor. But, 
if we were all falling together, it couldn’t be trying to fall 
any quicker, you know: for, if I let go, what more could 
it do than fall? And, as my hand would be falling too— 
at the same rate—it would never leave it, for that would 
be to get ahead of it in the race. And it could never over¬ 
take the falling floor!" 

"I see it clearly," said Lady Muriel. "But it makes one 
dizzy to think of such things! How can you make us do 
it?” 

"There is a more curious idea yet,” I ventured to say. 
"Suppose a cord fastened to the house, from below, and 
pulled down by some one on the planet. Then of course 
the house goes faster than its natural rate of falling: but 
the furniture—with our noble selves—would go on falling 
at their old pace, and would therefore be left behind.” 



A RIDE ON A LION 


313 

“Practically, we should rise to the ceiling,” said the 
Earl. “The inevitable result of which would be concus¬ 
sion of brain.” 

“To avoid that,” said Arthur, "let us have the furni¬ 
ture fixed to the floor, and ourselves tied down to the fur¬ 
niture. Then the five-o'clock-tea could go on in peace.” 

“With one little drawback!” Lady Muriel gaily inter¬ 
rupted. “We should take the cups down with us: but 
what about the tea?” 

“I had forgotten the tea” Arthur confessed. "That, no 
doubt, would rise to the ceiling—unless you chose to 
drink it on the way!” 

“Which, I think, is quite nonsense enough for one 
while!” said the Earl. “What nfews does this gentleman 
bring us from the great world of London?” 

This drew me into the conversation, which now took a 
more conventional tone. After a while, Arthur gave the 
signal for our departure, and in the cool of the evening 
we strolled down to the beach, enjoying the silence, bro¬ 
ken only by the murmur of the sea and the far-away 
music of some fishermen's song, almost as much as our late 
pleasant talk. 

We sat down among the rocks, by a little pool, so rich 
in animal, vegetable, and zoophytic—or whatever is the 
right word—life, that I became entranced in the study of 
it, and, when Arthur proposed returning to our lodgings, 
I begged to be left there for a while, to watch and muse 
alone. 

The fishermen's song grew ever nearer and clearer, as 
their boat stood in for the beach; and I would have gone 
down to see them land their cargo of fish, had not the 
microcosm at my feet stirred my curiosity yet more 
keenly. 

One ancient crab, that was for ever shuffling frantically 
from side to side of the pool, had particularly fascinated 
me: there was a vacancy in its stare, and an aimless viol¬ 
ence in its behaviour, that irresistibly recalled the Gar¬ 
dener who had befriended Sylvie and Bruno: and, as I 



314 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

gazed, I caught the concluding notes of the tune of his 
crazy song. 

The silence that followed was broken by the sweet voice 
of Sylvie. “Would you please let us out into the road?" 

“What! After that old beggar again?” the Gardener 
yelled, and began singing: 

“He thought he saw a Kangaroo 
That worked a coffee-mill: 

He looked again, and found it was 
A Vegetable-Pill. 

' Were I to swallow this’, he said, 

‘I should be very ill!' ” 

“We don't want him to swallow anything,” Sylvie ex¬ 
plained. “He’s not hungry. But we want to see him. So 
will you please-" 

“Certainly!" the Gardener promptly replied. “I always 
please. Never displeases nobody. There you are!” And he 
flung the door open, and let us out upon the dusty high¬ 
road. 

We soon found our way to the bush, which had so 
mysteriously sunk into the ground: and here Sylvie drew 
the Magic Locket from its hiding-place, turned it over 
with a thoughtful air, and at last appealed to Bruno in a 
rather helpless way. “What was it we had to do with it, 
Bruno? It’s all gone out of my head!” 

“Kiss it!” was Bruno’s invariable recipe in cases of 
doubt and difficulty. Sylvie kissed it, but no result fol¬ 
lowed. 

“Rub it the wrong way, was Bruno’s next suggestion. 

“Which is the wrong way?” Sylvie most reasonably 
enquired. The obvious plan was to try both ways. 

Rubbing from left to right had no visible effect what¬ 
ever. 

From right to left—“Oh, stop, Sylvie!” Bruno cried in 
sudden alarm. “Whatever is going to happen?” 

For a number of trees, on the neighbouring hillside, 
were moving slowly upwards, in solemn procession: while 



A RIDE ON A LION 315 

a mild little brook, that had been rippling at our feet a 
moment before, began to swell, and foam, and hiss, and 
bubble, in a truly alarming fashion. 

“Rub it some other way!” cried Bruno. “Try up-and- 
down! Quick!” 

It was a happy thought. Up-and-down did it: and the 
landscape, which had been showing signs of mental aber¬ 
ration in various directions, returned to its normal condi¬ 
tion of sobriety—with the exception of a small yellow¬ 
ish-brown mouse, which continued to run wildly up and 
down the road, lashing its tail like a little lion. * 

“Let’s follow it,” said Sylvie: and this also turned out 
a happy thought. The mouse at once settled down into a 
business-like jo^-frot,"with which we could easily keep 
pace. The only phenomenon, that gave me any uneasi¬ 
ness, was the rapid increase in the size of the little creature 
we were following, which became every moment more 
and more like a real lion. 

Soon the transformation was complete: and a noble 
lion stood patiently waiting for us to come up with it. No 
thought of fear seemed to occur to the children, who 
patted and stroked it as if it had been a Shetland-pony. 

“Help me up!” cried Bruno. And in another moment 
Sylvie had lifted him upon the broad back of the gentle 
beast, and seated herself behind him, pillion-fashion. 
Bruno took a good handful of mane in each hand, and 
made believe to guide this new kind of steed. “Gee-up!” 
seemed quite sufficient by way of verbal direction: the 
lion at once broke into an easy canter, and we soon found 
ourselves in the depths of the forest. I say “we”, for I am 
certain that I accompanied them—though how I managed 
to keep up with a cantering lion I am wholly unable to 
explain. But I was certainly one of the party when we 
came upon an old beggar-man cutting sticks, at whose 
feet the lion made a profound obeisance, Sylvie and Bruno 
at the same moment dismounting, and leaping into the 
arms of their father. 

“From bad to worse!” the old man said to himself. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


316 

dreamily, when the children had finished their rather con¬ 
fused account of the Ambassador’s visit, gathered no 
doubt from general report, as they had not seen him 
themselves. “From bad to worse! That is their destiny. I 
see it, but I cannot alter it. The selfishness of a mean and 
crafty man—the selfishness of an ambitious and silly 
woman—the selfishness of a spiteful and loveless child— 
all tend one way, from bad to worse! And you, my dar¬ 
lings, must suffer it awhile, I fear. Yet, when things are 
at their worst, you can come to me. I can do but little 
as yet-’’ 

Gathering up a handful of dust and scattering it in the 
air, he slowly and solemnly pronounced some words that 
sounded like a charm, the children looking on in awe¬ 
struck silence: 

“Let craft, ambition, spite, 

Be quenched in Reason’s night. 

Till weakness turn to might, 

Till what is dark be light, 

Till what is wrong be right 1“ 

The cloud of dust spread itself out through the air, as 
if it were alive, forming curious shapes that were for ever 
changing into others. 

“It makes letters! It makes words!” Bruno whispered, 
as he clung, half-frightened, to Sylvie. “Only I ca’n’t make 
them out! Read them, Sylvie!” 

"I’ll try,” Sylvie gravely replied. “Wait a minute—if 
only I could see that word-” 

“I should be very ill!” a discordant voice yelled in our 
ears. 

“ ‘Were I to swallow this’, he said, 

‘I should be very ill!’ ” 



Chapter IX 


A Jester and a Bear 

Yes, we were in the garden once more: and, to escape 
that horrid discordant voice, we hurried indoors, and 
found ourselves in the library—Uggug blubbering, the 
Professor standing by with a bewildered air, and my 
Lady, with her arms clasped round her son's neck, re¬ 
peating, over and over again, “and did they give him 
nasty lessons to learn? My own pretty pet!” 

“What’s all this noise about?” the Vice-Warden angrily 
enquired, as he strode into the room. “And who put the 
hat-stand here?” And he hung his hat up on Bruno, who 
was standing in the middle of the room, too much aston¬ 
ished by the sudden change of scene to make any attempt 
at removing it, though it came down to his shoulders, 
making him look something like a small candle with a 
large extinguisher over it. 

The Professor mildly explained that His Highness 
had been graciously pleased to say he wouldn't do his 
lessons. 

“Do your lessons this instant, you young cub!” thun¬ 
dered the Vice-Warden. “And take thisl” and a resound¬ 
ing box on the ear made the unfortunate Professor reel 
across the room. 

“Save me!” faltered the poor old man, as he sank, half- 
fainting, at my Lady’s feet. 

“Shave you? Of course I will!” my Lady replied, as she 
lifted him into a chair, and pinned an anti-macassar round 
his neck. “Where’s the razor?” 

The Vice-Warden meanwhile had got hold of Uggug, 
and was belabouring him with his umbrella. “Who left 
this loose nail in the floor?” he shouted. “Hammer it in, 
I say! Hammer it in!” Blow after blow fell on the writhing 
Uggug, till he dropped howling to the floor. 

Then his father turned to the “shaving” scene which 
was being enacted, and roared with laughter. “Excuse 

317 



3l8 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

me, dear, I ca’n’t help it!” he said as soon as he could 
speak. “You are such an utter donkey! Kiss me, Tabby!” 

And he flung his arms round the neck of the terrified 
Professor, who raised a wild shriek, but whether he re¬ 
ceived the threatened kiss or not I was unable to see, as 
Bruno, who had by this time released himself from his 
extinguisher, rushed headlong out of the room, followed 
by Sylvie; and I was so fearful of being left alone among 
all these crazy creatures that I hurried after them. 

"We must go to Father!” Sylvie panted, as they ran 
down the garden. "I’m sure things are at their worst! I’ll 
ask the Gardener to let us out again.” 

"But we ca’n’t walk all the way!” Bruno whimpered. 
"How I wiss we had a coach-and-four, like Uncle!” 

And, shrill and wild, rang through the air the familiar 
voice: 


“He thought he saw a Coach-and-Four 
That stood beside his bed: 

He looked again, and found it was 
A Bear without a Head. 

‘Poor thing,' he said, ‘poor silly thing! 

It’s waiting to be fed!’ ” 

"No, I ca’n’t let you out again!” he said, before the 
children could speak. "The Vice-Warden gave it me, he 
did, for letting you out last time! So be off with you!” 
And, turning away from them, he began digging franti¬ 
cally in the middle of a gravel-walk, singing, over and 
over again, 


" ‘Poor thing,’ he said, ‘poor silly thing! 

It’s waiting to be fed!' ” 

but in a more musical tone than the shrill screech in 
which he had begun. 

The music grew fuller and richer at every moment: 
other manly voices joined in the refrain: and soon I heard 
the heavy thud that told me the boat had touched the 
beach, and the harsh grating of the shingle as the men 



A JESTER AND A BEAR 319 

dragged it up. I roused myself, and, after lending them a 
hand in hauling up their boat, I lingered yet awhile to 
watch them disembark a goodly assortment of the hard- 
won “treasures of the deep”. 

When at last I reached our lodgings I was tired and 
sleepy, and glad enough to settle down again into the 
easy-chair, while Arthur hospitably went to his cupboard, 
to get me out some cake and wine, without which, he 
declared, he could not, as a doctor, permit my going to 
bed. 

And how that cupboard-door did creak! It surely could 
not be Arthur, who was opening and shutting it so often, 
moving so restlessly about, and muttering like the solil¬ 
oquy of a tragedy-queen! 

No, it was a female voice. Also the figure—half-hidden 
by the cupboard-door—w r as a female figure, massive, and 
in flowing robes. Could it be the landlady? The door 
opened, and a strange man entered the room. 

“What is that donkey doing?” he said to himself, paus¬ 
ing, aghast, on the threshold. 

The lady, thus rudely referred to, was his wife. She 
had got one of the cupboards open, and stood with her 
back to him, smoothing down a sheet of brown paper on 
one of the shelves, and whispering to herself “So, so! 
Deftly done! Craftily contrived!” 

Her loving husband stole behind her on tip-toe, and 
tapped her on the head. “Boh!” he playfully shouted at 
her ear. “Never tell me again I ca’n’t say 'boh' to a goose!” 

My Lady wrung her hands. “Discovered!” she groaned. 
“Yet no—he is one of us! Reveal it not, oh Man! Let it 
bide its time!” 

“Reveal what not?” her husband testily replied, drag¬ 
ging out the sheet of brown paper. “What are you hiding 
here, my Lady? I insist upon knowing!” 

My Lady cast down her eyes, and spoke in the littlest 
of little voices. “Don’t make fun of it, Benjamin!” she 
pleaded. “It’s—it’s—don’t you understand? It’s a 
dagger!” 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


320 

“And what’s that for?” sneered His Excellency. “We’ve 
only got to make people think he’s dead! We haven’t got 
to kill him! And made of tin, too!” he snarled, contemp¬ 
tuously bending the blade round his thumb. Now, Ma¬ 
dam, you’ll be good enough to explain. First, what do you 
call me Benjamin for?” 

“It’s part of the Conspiracy, Love! One must have an 
alias, you know-” 

“Oh, an alias, is it? Well! And next, what did you get 
this dagger for? Come, no evasions? You ca’n’t deceive 
me!” 

“I got it for—for—for-” the detected Conspirator 

stammered, trying her best to put on the assassin-expres¬ 
sion that she had been practising at the looking-glass. 
“For-” 

“For what, Madam!” 

“Well, for eighteenpence, if you must know, dearest! 
That’s what I got it for, on my-” 

“Now don’t say your Word and Honour!” groaned the 
other Conspirator. “Why, they aren’t worth half the 
money, put together!” 

“On my birthday ,” my Lady concluded in a meek whis¬ 
per. “One must have a dagger, you know. It’s part of 
the-” 

“Oh, don’t talk of Conspiracies!” her husband savagely 
interrupted, as he tossed the dagger into the cupboard. 
“You know about as much how to manage a Conspiracy 
as if you were a chicken. Why, the first thing is to get a 
disguise. Now, just look at this!” 

And with pardonable pride he fitted on the cap and 
bells, and the rest of the Fool’s dress, and winked at her, 
and put his tongue in his cheek. “Is that the sort of thing, 
now?” he demanded. 

My Lady's eyes flashed with all a Conspirator’s en¬ 
thusiasm. “The very thing!” she exclaimed, clapping her 
hands. “You do look, oh, such a ■perfect Fool!” 

The Fool smiled a doubtful smile. He was not quite 
clear whether it was a compliment or not, to express it 



A JESTER AND A BEAR 321 

so plainly. “You mean a Jester? Yes, that’s what I in¬ 
tended. And what do you think your disguise is to be?” 
And he proceeded to unfold the parcel, the lady watching 
him in rapture. 

“Oh, how lovely!” she cried, when at last the dress was 
unfolded. “What a splendid disguise! An Esquimaux 
peasant-woman! ’ ’ 

“An Esquimaux peasant, indeed!” growled the other. 
“Here, put it on, and look at yourself in the glass. Why, 
it’s a Bear, ca’n’t you use your eyes?” He checked himself 
suddenly, as a harsh voice yelled through the room 

“He looked again, and found it was 
A Bear without a Head /” 

But it was only the Gardener, singing under the open 
window. The Vice-Warden stole on tip-toe to the window, 
and closed it noiselessly, before he ventured to go on! 
“Yes, Lovey, a Bear: but not without a head, I hope, 
You’re the Bear, and me the Keeper. And if any one 
knows us, they’ll have sharp eyes, that’s all!” 

“I shall have to practise the steps a bit,” my Lady said, 
looking out through the Bear’s mouth: “one ca’n’t help 
being rather human just at first, you know. And of course 
you’ll say, ‘Come up. Bruin!’, won’t you?” 

“Yes, of course,” replied the Keeper, laying hold of the 
chain, that hung from the Bear’s collar, with one hand, 
while with the other he cracked a little whip. “Now go 
round the room in a sort of a dancing attitude. Very 
good, my dear, very good. Come up, Bruin! Come up, 
Isay!” “ 

He roared out the last words for the benefit of Uggug, 
who had just come into the room, and was now standing, 
with his hands spread out, and eyes and mouth wide 
open, the very picture of stupid amazement. “Oh, my!” 
was all he could gasp out. 

The Keeper pretended to be adjusting the bear’s collar, 
which gave him an opportunity of whispering, unheard 
by Uggug, “my fault, I’m afraid! Quite forgot to fasten 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


322 

the door. Plot’s ruined if he finds it out! Keep it up a 
minute or two longer. Be savage!” Then, while seeming to 
pull it back with all his strength, he let it advance upon 
the scared boy: my Lady, with admirable presence of 
mind, kept up what she no doubt intended for a savage 
growl, though it was more like the purring of a cat: and 
Uggug backed out of the room with such haste that he 
tripped over the mat, and was heard to fall heavily out¬ 
side—an accident to which even his doting mother paid 
no heed, in the excitement of the moment. 

The Vice-Warden shut and bolted the door. "Off with 
the disguises!” he panted. ‘‘There’s not a moment to lose. 
He’s sure to fetch the Professor, and we couldn’t take 
him in, you know!” And in another minute the disguises 
were stowed away in the cupboard, the door unbolted, 
and the two Conspirators seated lovingly side-by-side on 
the sofa, earnestly discussing a book the Vice-Warden 
had hastily snatched off the table, which proved to be the 
City-Directory of the capital of Outland. 

The door opened, very slowly and cautiously, and the 
Professor peeped in, Uggug’s stupid face being just visible 
behind him. 

“It is a beautiful arrangement!” the Vice-Warden was 
saying with enthusiasm. “You see, my precious one, that 
there are fifteen houses in Green Street, before you turn 
into West Street.” 

“Fifteen houses! Is it possible ?” my Lady replied. “I 
thought it was fourteen!” And, so intent were they on 
this interesting question, that neither of them even looked 
up till the Professor, leading Uggug by the hand, stood 
close before them. 

My Lady was the first to notice their approach. “Why, 
here’s the Professor!” she exclaimed in her blandest tones. 
“And my precious child too! Are lessons over?” 

“A strange thing has happened!” the Professor began 
in a trembling tone. “His Exalted Fatness” (this was one 
of Uggug’s many titles) "tells me he has just seen, in this 
very room, a Dancing-Bear and a Court-Jester!” 



A JESTER AND A BEAR 32 3 

The Vice-Warden and his wife shook with well-acted 
merriment. 

“Not in this room, darling!” said the fond mother. 

“We’ve been sitting here this hour or more, reading-,” 

here she referred to the book lying on her lap, “—read¬ 
ing the—the City-Directory.” 

“Let me feel your pulse, my boy!” said the anxious 
father. “Now put out your tongue. Ah, I thought so! He’s 
a little feverish, Professor, and has had a bad dream. Put 
him to bed at once, and give him a cooling draught.” 

“I ain’t been dreaming!” his Exalted Fatness remon¬ 
strated, as the Professor led him away. 

“Bad grammar, Sir!” his father remarked with some 
sternness. “Kindly attend to that little matter, Professor, 
as soon as you have corrected the feverishness. And, by 
the way, Professor!” (The Professor left his distinguished 
pupil standing at the door, and meekly returned.) “There 
is a rumour afloat, that the people wish to elect an—in 
point of fact, an—you understand that I mean an-” 

“Not another ProfessorV’ the poor old man exclaimed 
in horror. 

“No! Certainly not!” the Vice-Warden eagerly ex¬ 
plained. "Merely an Emperor, you understand.” 

“An EmperorY’ cried the astonished Professor, holding 
his head between his hands, as if he expected it to come 
to pieces with the shock. “What will the Warden-” 

“Why, the Warden will most likely be the new Em¬ 
peror!” my Lady explained. "Where could we find a 
better? Unless, perhaps-” she glanced at her husband. 

“Where, indeed!” the Professor fervently responded, 
quite failing to take the hint. 

The Vice-War den resumed the thread of his discourse. 
"The reason I mentioned it, Professor, was to ask you to 
be so kind as to preside at the Election. You see it would 
make the thing respectable —no suspicion of anything 
underhand-” 

“I fear I ca’n’t,your Excellency!” the old man faltered. 
“What will the Warden-” 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


324 

“True, true!” the Vice-Warden interrupted. “Your 
position, as Court-Professor, makes it awkward, I ad¬ 
mit. Well, well! Then the Election shall be held without 
you.” 

“Better so, than if it were held within me!” the Pro¬ 
fessor murmured with a bewildered air, as if he hardly 
knew what he was saying. “Bed, I think your Highness 
said, and a cooling-draught?” And he wandered dreamily 
back to where Uggug sulkily awaited him. 

I followed them out of the room, and down the passage, 
the Professor murmuring to himself, all the time, as a 
kind of aid to his feeble memory, “C, C, C; Couch, Cooling- 
Draught, Correct-Grammar”, till, in turning a comer, he 
met Sylvie and Bruno, so suddenly that the startleff Pro¬ 
fessor let go of his fat pupil, who instantly took to his 
heels. 


Chapter X 
The Other Professor 

“We were looking for you!” cried Sylvie, in a tone of 
great relief. “We do want you so much, you ca'n’t think!” 

“What is it, dear children?” the Professor asked, beam¬ 
ing on them with a very different look from what Uggug 
ever got from him. 

“We want you to speak to the Gardener for us,” Sylvie 
said, as she and Bruno took the old man’s hands and led 
him into the hall. 

“He’s ever so unkind!” Bruno mournfully added. 
“They’s all unkind to us, now that Father’s gone. The 
Lion were much nicer!” 

“But you must explain to me, please,” the Professor 
said with an anxious look, “which is the Lion, and which 
is the Gardener. It’s most important not to get two such 



THE OTHER PROFESSOR 325 

animals confused together. And one’s very liable to do it 
in their case—both having mouths, you know-” 

“Doos 00 always confuses two animals together?" 
Bruno asked. 

"Pretty often, I’m afraid," the Professor candidly com 
fessed. "Now, for instance, there’s the rabbit-hutch and 
the hall-clock." The Professor pointed them out. “One 
gets a little confused with them —both having doors, you 
know. Now, only yesterday—would you believe it?—I 
put some lettuces into the clock, and tried to wind up the 
rabbit!” 

"Did the rabbit go, after oo wounded it up?” said 
Bruno. 

The Professor clasped his hands on the top of his head, 
and groaned. "Go? I should think it did go! Why, it's 
gone] And where ever it’s gone to—that’s what I ca’n’t 
find out! I’ve done my best—I’ve read all the article 
‘Rabbit’ in the great dictionary—Come in!" 

"Only the tailor, Sir, with your little bill,” said a meek 
voice outside the door. 

"Ah, well, I can soon settle his business," the Professor 
said to the children, "if you’ll just wait a minute. How 
much is it, this year, my man?” The tailor had come in 
while he was speaking. 

"Well, it’s been a doubling so many years, you see,” 
the tailor replied, a little gruffly, "and I think I’d like the 
money now. It’s two thousand pound, it is!” 

“Oh, that’s nothing!” the Professor carelessly re¬ 
marked, feeling in his pocket, as if he always carried at 
least that amount about with him. "But wouldn’t you like 
to wait just another year, and make it four thousand? 
Just think how rich you’d be! Why, you might be a King, 
if you liked!” 

"I don’t know as I’d care about being a King,” the man 
said thoughtfully. "But it dew sound a powerful sight o' 
money! Well, I think I’ll wait-” 

"Of course you will!” said the Professor. "There’s good 
sense in you, I see. Good-day to you, my man!” 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


326 

“Will you ever have to pay him that four thousand 
pounds?" Sylvie asked as the door closed on the depart¬ 
ing creditor. 

"Never, my child!” the Professor replied emphatically. 
“He’ll go on doubling it, till he dies. You see it’s always 
worth while waiting another year, to get twice as much 
money! And now what would you like to do, my little 
friends? Shall I take you to see the Other Professor? This 
would be an excellent opportunity for a visit,” he said to 
himself, glancing at his watch: “he generally takes a short 
rest—of fourteen minutes and a half—about this time.” 

Bruno hastily went round to Sylvie, who was standing 
at the other side of the Professor, and put his hand into 
hers. “I thinks we’d like to go,” he said doubtfully: “only 
please let’s go all together. It’s best to be on the safe side,. 
00 know!” 

"Why, you talk as if you were Sylviel” exclaimed the 
Professor. 

“I know I did,” Bruno replied very humbly. “I quite 
forgotted I wasn’t Sylvie. Only I fought he might be 
rarver fierce!” 

The Professor laughed a jolly laugh. "Oh, he’s quite 
tame!” he said. “He never bites. He's only a little—a little 
dreamy, you know.” He took hold of Bruno’s other hand, 
and led the children down a long passage I had never 
noticed before—not that there was anything remarkable 
in that : I was constantly coming on new rooms and pas¬ 
sages in that mysterious Palace, and very seldom suc¬ 
ceeded in finding the old ones again. 

Near the end of the passage the Professor stopped. 
"This is his room,” he said, pointing to the solid wall. 

“We ca’n’t get in through therel ” Bruno exclaimed. 

Sylvie said nothing, till she had carefully examined 
whether the wall opened anywhere. Then she laughed 
merrily. “You’re playing us a trick, you dear old thing!” 
she said. “There’s no door here!” 

“There isn’t any door to the room,” said the Professor. 
“We shall have to climb in at the window.” 



THE OTHER PROFESSOR 


327 

So we went into the garden, and soon found the win¬ 
dow of the Other Professor’s room. It was a ground-floor 
window, and stood invitingly open: the Professor first 
lifted the two children in, and then he and I climbed in 
after them. 

The Other Professor was seated at a table, with a large 
book open before him, on which his forehead was rest¬ 
ing: he had clasped his arms round the book, and was 
snoring heavily. “He usually reads like that”, the Profes¬ 
sor remarked, “when the book’s very interesting: and then 
sometimes it’s very difficult to get him to attend!” 

This seemed to be one of the difficult times: the Pro¬ 
fessor lifted him up, once or twice, and shook him viol¬ 
ently: but he always returned to his book the moment he 
was let go of, and showed by his heavy breathing that 
the book was as interesting as ever. 

“How dreamy he is!” the Professor exclaimed. “He 
must have got to a very interesting part of the book!” And 
he rained quite a shower of thumps on the Other Pro¬ 
fessor’s back, shouting “Hoy! Hoy!” all the time. “Isn’t 
it wonderful that he should be so dreamy?” he said to 
Bruno. 

“If he’s always as sleepy as that,” Bruno remarked, “a 
course he’s dreamy!” 

“But what are we to do?” said the Professor. “You see 
he’s quite wrapped up in the book!” 

“Suppose 00 shuts the book?” Bruno suggested. 

“That’s it!” cried the delighted Professor. “Of course 
that'll do it!” And he shut up the book so quickly that 
he caught the Other Professor’s nose between the leaves, 
and gave it a severe pinch. 

The Other Professor instantly rose to his feet, and car¬ 
ried the book away to the end of the room, where he put 
it back in its place in the book-case. “I’ve been reading 
for eighteen hours and three-quarters,” he said, “and now 
I shall rest for fourteen minutes and a half. Is the Lecture 
all ready?” 

“Very nearly,” the Professor humbly replied. “I shall 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


328 

ask you to give me a hint or two—there will be a few 
little difficulties-” 

"And a Banquet, I think you said?" 

"Oh, yes! The Banquet comes first , of course. People 
never enjoy Abstract Science, you know, when they’re 
ravenous with hunger. And then there’s the Fancy-Dress- 
Ball. Oh, there’ll be lots of entertainment!” 

"Where will the Ball come in?" said the Other Pro¬ 
fessor. 

"I think it had better come at the beginning of the 
Banquet—it brings people together so nicely, you 
know.” 

"Yes, that’s the right order. First the Meeting: then the 
Eating: then the Treating—for I’m sure any Lecture you 
give us will be a treat!” said the Other Professor, who 
had been standing with his back to us all this time, occu¬ 
pying himself in taking the books out, one by one, and 
turning them upside-down. An easel, with a blackboard 
on it, stood near him: and, every time that he turned a 
book upside-down, he made a mark on the board with a 
piece of chalk. 

"And as to the ‘Pig-Tale’—which you have so kindly 
promised to give us-” the Professor went on, thought¬ 

fully rubbing his chin. "I think that had better come at 
the end of the Banquet: then people can listen to it 
quietly.” 

"Shall I sing it?” the Other Professor asked, with a 
smile of delight. 

"If you can,” the Professor replied, cautiously. 

"Let me try,” said the Other Professor, seating himself 
at the pianoforte. "For the sake of argument, let us as¬ 
sume that it begins on A flat." And he struck the note in 
question. "La, la, la! I think that’s within an octave of 
it.” He struck the note again, and appealed to Bruno, 
who was standing at his side. “Did I sing it like that, my 
child?” 

"No, 00 didn’t,” Bruno replied with great decision. "It 
were more like a duck.” 



THE OTHER PROFESSOR 329 

"Single notes are apt to have that effect,” the Other 
Professor said with a sigh. "Let me try a whole verse. 

There was a Pig, that sat alone, 

Beside a ruined Pump. 

By day and night he made his moan: 

It would have stirred a heart of stone 

To see him wring his hoofs and groan. 

Because he could not jump. 

Would you call that a tune. Professor?” he asked, when 
he had finished. 

The Professor considered a little. “Well,” he said at 
last, "some of the notes are the same as others—and some 
are different—but I should hardly call it a tune.” 

"Let me try it a bit by myself,” said the Other Profes¬ 
sor. And he began touching the notes here and there, 
and humming to himself like an angry bluebottle. 

"How do you like his singing?” the Professor asked the 
children in a low voice. 

"It isn't very beautiful,” Sylvie said, hesitatingly. 

"It’s very extremely uglyl” Bruno said, without any 
hesitation at all. 

"All extremes are bad," the Professor said, very 
gravely. “For instance, Sobriety is a very good thing, 
when practised in moderation : but even Sobriety, when 
carried to an extreme, has its disadvantages.” 

"What are its disadvantages?” was the question that 
rose in my mind—and, as usual, Bruno asked it for me. 
"What are its lizard bandages?” 

"Well, this is one of them,” said the Professor. "When 
a man’s tipsy (that's one extreme, you know), he sees one 
thing as two. But, when he’s extremely sober (that's the 
other extreme), he sees two things as one. It's equally in¬ 
convenient, whichever happens.” 

"What does ‘inconvenient’ mean?” Bruno whispered to 
Sylvie. 

"The difference between ‘convenient’ and ‘inconven¬ 
ient’ is best explained by an example,” said the Other 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


330 

Professor, who had overheard the question. “If you’ll just 
think over any Poem that contains the two words—such 
as-” 

The Professor put his hands over his ears, with a look 
of dismay. “If you once let him begin a Poem” he said 
to Sylvie, “he’ll never leave off again! He never does!” 

“Did he ever begin a Poem and not leave off again?” 
Sylvie enquired. 

“Three times,” said the Professor. /:: 

Bruno raised himself on tiptoe, till his lips were on a 
level with Sylvie’s ear. “What became of them three 
Poems?” he whispered. “Is he saying them all now?” 

“Hush!” said Sylvie. "The Other Professor is speak¬ 
ing!” 

“I'll say it very quick,” murmured the Other Professor, 
with downcast eyes, and melancholy voice, which con¬ 
trasted oddly with his face, as he had forgotten to leave 
off smiling. (“At least it wasn’t exactly a smile," as Sylvie 
said afterwards: “it looked as if his mouth was made that 
shape.”) 

“Go on then,” said the Professor. "What must be must 
be." 

“Remember that!” Sylvie whispered to Bruno. “It's a 
very good rule for whenever you hurt yourself.” 

“And it’s a very good rule for whenever I make a 
noise,” said the saucy little fellow. “So you remember it 
too, Miss!” 

“Whatever do you mean?” said Sylvie, trying to frown, 
a thing she never managed particularly well. 

“Oftens and oftens,” said Bruno, “haven’t 00 told me 
‘There mustn’t be so much noise,Bruno!' when I’ve tolded 
00 There mustY Why, there isn’t no rules at all about 
‘There mustn’t'! But 00 never believes me\" 

“As if any one could believe you, you wicked wicked 
boy!” said Sylvie. The words were severe enough, but I 
am of opinion that, when you are really anxious to im¬ 
press a criminal with a sense of his guilt, you ought not to 
pronounce the sentence with your lips quite close to his 



PETER AND PAUL 33I 

cheek—since a kiss at the end of it, however accidental, 
weakens the effect terribly. 


Chapter XI 
Peter and Paul 

“As I was saying,’’ the Other Professor resumed, “if 
you’ll just think over any Poem, that contains the words 
—such as 

'Peter is poor,’ said noble Paul, 

'And I have always been his friend: 

And, though my means to give are small, 

At least I can afford to lend. 

How few, in this cold age of greed, 

Do good, except on selfish grounds! 

But I can feel for Peter's need, 

And I WILL LEND HIM FIFTY POUNDS!’ 

How great was Peter’s joy to find 
His friend in such a genial vein! 

How cheerfully the bond he signed, 

T0 pay the money back again! 

‘We ca’n’t’, said Patti, ‘be too precise: 

’Tis best to fix the very day: 

So, by a learned friend's advice, 

I’ve made it Noon, the Fourth of May.’ 

‘But this is April!’ Peter said. 

‘The First of April, as I think. 

Five little weeks will soon be fled: 

One scarcely will have time to wink! 

Give me a year to speculate — 

T0 buy and sell—to drive a trade —’ 

Said Paul ‘I cannot change the date. 

On May the Fourth it must be paid.’ 



332 


SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


‘Well, well!’ said Peter, with a sigh. 

‘Hand me the cash, and I will go. 

I’ll form a Joint-Stock Company, 

And turn an honest pound or so.’ 

‘I’m grieved', said Paul, ‘to seem unkind: 

The money shall of course be lent: 

But, for a week or two, I find 
It will not be convenient.’ 

So, week by week, poor Peter came 
And turned in heaviness away; 

For still the answer was the same, 

‘I cannot manage it to-day.’ 

And now the April showers were dry — 

The five short weeks were nearly spent — 
Yet still he got the old reply, 

‘It is not quite convenient!’ 

The Fourth arrived, and punctual Paul 
Came, with his legal friend, at noon. 

'I thought it best’, said he, ‘to call: 

One cannot settle things too soon.’ 

Poor Peter shuddered in despair: 

His flowing locks he wildly tore: 

And very soon his yellow hair 
Was lying all about the floor. 

The legal friend was standing by. 

With sudden pity half unmanned: 

The tear-drop trembled in his eye, 

The signed agreement in his hand: 

But when at length the legal soul 
Resumed its customary force, 

‘The Law’, he said, ‘we can’t control: 

Pay, or the Law must take its course!’ 


Said Paul ‘How bitterly I rue 

That fatal morning when I called! 
Consider, Peter, what you do! 

You wo’n’t be richer when you’re bald! 



PETER AND PAUL 


333 


Think you, by rending curls away, 

To make your difficulties less? 
Forbear this violence, I pray: 

You do but add to my distress!' 

'Not willingly would I inflict’, 

Said Peter, ‘on that noble heart 
One needless pang. Yet why so strict? 

Is this to act a friendly part? 

However legal it may be 

To pay what never has been lent. 

This style of business seems to me 
Extremely inconvenient! 

'No Nobleness of soul have I, 

Like some that in this Age are found!’ 
{Paul blushed in sheer humility, 

And cast his eyes upon the ground.) 
‘This debt will simply swallow all. 

And make my life a life of woe!’ 

'Nay, nay, my Peter!’ answered Paul. 

' You must not rati on Fortune so! 


‘ You have enough to eat and drink: 

You are respected in the world: 

And at the barber’s, as I think, 

You often get your whiskers curled. 
Though Nobleness you ca’n’t attain — 
To any very great extent — 

The path of Honesty is plain. 

However inconvenient!’ 

' ’Tis true’, said Peter, ‘I’m alive: 

I keep my station in the world: 

Once in the week I just contrive 

To get my whiskers oiled and curled. 
But my assets are very low: 

My little income’s overspent: 

To trench on capital, you know. 

Is always inconvenient!’ 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


‘But pay your debts!’ cried honest Paul. 

*My gentle Peter, pay your debts! 

What matter if it swallows all 

That you describe as your "assets”? 

A heady you’re an hour behind: 

Yet Generosity is best. 

It pinches me—but never mind! 

I WILL NOT CHARGE YOU INTEREST!’ 

‘How good! How great!’ poor Peter cried. 

‘Yet I must sell my Sunday wig — 

The scarf-pin that has been my pride — 

My grand piano—and my pig!’ 

Full soon his property took wings: 

And daily, as each treasure went. 

He sighed to find the state of things 
Grow less and less convenient. 

Weeks grew to months, and months to years: 

Peter was worn to skin and bone: 

A nd once he even said, with tears, 

'Remember, Paul, that promised Loan!’ 

Said Paul ‘I’ll lend you, when I can, 

A ll the spare money I have got — 

Ah, Peter, you're a happy man! 

Yours is an enviable lot! 


‘I’m getting stout, as you may see: 

It is but seldom I am well: 

I cannot feel my ancient glee 
In listening to the dinner-bell: 
But you, you gambol like a boy, 

Your figure is so spare and light: 
The dinner-bell’s a note of joy 
To such a healthy appetite!’ 

Said Peter ‘1 am well aware 
Mine is a state of happiness: 
And yet how gladly could I spare 
Some of the comforts I possess! 



PETER AND ?AUL 

What you call healthy appetite 
1 feel as Hunger’s savage tooth: 

And, when no dinner is in sight, 

The dinner-bell’s a sound of ruth! 

‘No scare-crow would accept this coat: 

Such boots as these you seldom see, 
Ah, Paul, a single five-pound note 
Would make another man of me!’ 
Said Paul ‘It fills me with surprise 
To hear you talk in such a tone: 

I fear you scarcely realize 

The blessings that are all your own! 

‘ You’re safe from being overfed: 

You’re sweetly picturesque in rags: 
You never know the aching head 
That comes along with money-bags: 
And you have time to cultivate 
That best of qualities, Content — 

For which you’ll find your present state 
Remarkably convenient!’ 


Said Peter ‘Though I cannot sound 
The depths of such a man as you. 

Yet in your character I’ve found 
An inconsistency or two. 

You seem to have long years to spare 
When there’s a promise to fulfil: 

And yet how punctual you were 
In calling with that little bill!' 

‘One ca’n’t be too deliberate’, 

Said Paul, ‘in parting with-one’s pelf. 

With bills, as you correctly state, 

I’m punctuality itself. 

A man may surely claim his dues: 

But, when there’s money to be lent, 

A man must be allowed to choose 
Such times as are convenient!’ 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


It chanced one day, as Peter sat 

Gnawing a crust—his usual meal — 
Paul bustled in to have a chat, 

And grasped his hand with friendly zeal 
'I knew’, said he, ‘your frugal ways: 

So, that I might not wound your pride 
By bringing strangers in to gaze, 

I’ve left my legal friend outside! 

‘You well remember, 1 am sure, 

When first your wealth began to go, 

And people sneered at one so poor, 

I never used my Peter so! 

And when you’d lost your little all. 

And found yourself a thing despised, 

I need not ask you to recall 
How tenderly I sympathized! 


‘Then the advice I’ve poured on you, 

So full of wisdom and of wit: 

All given gratis, though ’tis true 
I might have fairly charged for it! 

But I refrain from mentioning 
Full many a deed I might relate — 

For boasting is a kind of thing 
That I particularly hate. 

'How vast the total sum appears 
Of all the kindnesses I’ve done. 

From Childhood’s half-forgotten years 
Down to that Loan of April One! 

That Fifty Pounds! You little guessed 
How deep it drained my slender store: 

But there’s a heart within this breast. 

And I WILL LEND YOU FIFTY MORE!’ 

‘Not so,’ was Peter’s mild reply. 

His cheeks all wet with grateful tears: 

‘No man recalls, so well as I, 

Your services in bygone years: 



A MUSICAL GARDENER 


337 


And this new offer, I admit, 

Is very very kindly meant — 

Still, to avail myself of it 

Would not be quite convenient!’ 

“You’ll see in a moment what the difference is between 
‘convenient’ and ‘inconvenient’. You quite understand it 
now, don’t you?” he added, looking kindly at Bruno, who 
was sitting, at Sylvie’s side, on the floor. 

“Yes,” said Bruno, very quietly. Such a short speech 
was very unusual, for him: but just then he seemed, I 
fancied, a little exhausted. In fact, he climbed up into 
Sylvie’s lap as he spoke, and rested his head against her 
shoulder. “What a many verses it was!” he whispered. 


Chapter XII 
A Musical Gardener 

The Other Professor regarded him with some anxiety. 
“The smaller animal ought to go to bed at once,” he said 
with an air of authority. 

“Why at once?” said the Professor. 

“Because he ca’n’t go at twice,” said the Other Pro¬ 
fessor. 

The Professor gently clapped his hands. "Isn’t he won¬ 
derful!” he said to Sylvie. “Nobody else could have 
thought of the reason, so quick. Why, of course he ca’n’t 
go at twice! It would hurt him to be divided.” 

This remark woke up Bruno, suddenly and completely. 
“I don’t want to be divided,” he said decisively. 

“It does very well on a diagram,” said the Other Pro¬ 
fessor. “I could show it you in a minute, only the chalk’s 
a little blunt.” 

“Take care!” Sylvie anxiously exclaimed, as he began, 
rather clumsily, to point it. “You’ll cut your finger off, if 
you hold the knife so!” 

M L.C. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


338 

“If 00 cuts it off, will 00 give it to me, please?” Bruno 
thoughtfully added. 

“It's like this,” said the Other Professor, hastily draw¬ 
ing a long line upon the black board, and marking the 
letters “A”, "B”, at the two ends, and “C” in the middle: 
“let me explain it to you. If AB were to be divided into 
two parts at C-” 

“It would be drownded,” Bruno pronounced con¬ 
fidently. 

The Other Professor gasped. “What would be drown¬ 
ded?” 

“Why the bumble-bee, of course!” said Bruno. “And 
the two bits would sink down in the sea!” 

Here the Professor interfered, as the Other Professor 
was evidently too much puzzled to go on with his dia¬ 
gram. 

“When I said it would hurt him, I was merely referring 
to the action of the nerves-” 

The Other Professor brightened up in a moment. “The 
action of the nerves”, he began eagerly, “is curiously slow 
in some people. I had a friend, once, that if you burnt him 
with a red-hot poker, it would take years and years before 
he felt it!” 

“And if you only pinched him?” queried Sylvie. 

“Then it would take ever so much longer, of course. In 
fact, I doubt if the man himself would ever feel it, at all. 
His grandchildren might.” 

“I wouldn't like to be the grandchild of a pinched 
grandfather, would you, Mister Sir?” Bruno whispered. 
“It might come just when you wanted to be happy!” 

That would be awkward, I admitted, taking it quite 
as a matter of course that he had so suddenly caught 
sight of me. “But don’t you always want to be happy, 
Bruno?” 

“Not always,” Bruno said thoughtfully. “Sometimes, 
when I’s too happy, I wants to be a little miserable. Then 
I just tell Sylvie about it, 00 know, and Sylvie sets me 
some lessons. Then it’s all right.” 



A MUSICAL GARDENER 339 

“I’m sorry you don’t like lessons,’’ I said. “You should 
copy Sylvie. She’s always as busy as the day is long!” 

“Well, so am I!” said Bruno. 

“No, no!” Sylvie corrected him. " You’re as busy as the 
day is short!” 

“Well, what’s the difference?” Bruno asked. “Mister 
Sir, isn’t the day as short as it’s long? I mean, isn’t it the 
same length?” 

Never having considered the question in this light, 1 
suggested that they had better ask the Professor; and 
they ran off in a moment to appeal to their old friend. 
The Professor left off polishing his spectacles to consider. 
“My dears,” he said after a minute, “the day is the same 
length as anything that is the same length as it.” And he 
resumed his never-ending task of polishing. 

The children returned, slowly and thoughtfully, to 
report his answer. “ Isn’t he wise?” Sylvie asked in an 
awe-struck whisper. “If I was as wise as that, I should 
have a headache all day long, I know I should!” 

“You appear to be talking to somebody—that isn’t 
here,” the Professor said, turning round to the children. 
“Who is it?” 

Bruno looked puzzled. “I never talks to nobody when 
he isn’t here!” he replied. “It isn’t good manners. Oo 
should always wait till he comes, before oo talks to 
him!” 

The Professor looked anxiously in my direction, and 
seemed to look through and through me without seeing 
me. “Then who are you talking to?” he said. “There isn’t 
anybody here, you know, except the Other Professor— 
and he isn’t here!” he added wildly, turning round and 
round like a teetotum. “Children! Help to look for him! 
Quick! He's got lost again!” 

The children were on their feet in a moment. 

"Where shall we look?” said Sylvie. 

"Anywhere!” shouted the excited Professor. “Only be 
quick about it!” And he began trotting round and round 
the room, lifting up the chairs, and shaking them. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


340 

Bruno took a very small book out of the bookcase, 
opened it, and shook it in imitation of the Professor. “He 
isn’t here,” he said. 

“He can’t be there, Bruno!” Sylvie said indignantly. 

“Course he ca’n’t!” said Bruno. “I should have shooked 
him out, if he’d been in there!” 

“Has he ever been lost before?” Sylvie enquired, turn¬ 
ing up a corner of the hearth-rug, and peeping under it. 

“Once before,” said the Professor: “he once lost himself 
in a wood-” 

“And couldn’t he find his-self again?” said Bruno. 
“Why didn’t he shout? He’d be sure to hear his-self, 
’cause he couldn’t be far off, 00 know.” 

“Let’s try shouting,” said the Professor. 

“What shall we shout?” said Sylvie. 

“On second thoughts, don’t shout,” the Professor re¬ 
plied. “The Vice-Warden might hear you. He’s getting 
awfully strict!” 

This reminded the poor children of all the troubles, 
about which they had come to their old friend. Bruno sat 
down on the floor and began crying. “He is so cruel!” he 
sobbed. “And he lets Uggug take away all my toys! And 
such horrid meals!” 

“What did you have for dinner to-day?” said the 
Professor. 

"A little piece of a dead crow,” was Bruno’s mournful 
reply. 

“He means rook-pie,” Sylvie explained. 

“It were a dead crow,” Bruno persisted. “And there 
were a apple-pudding—and Uggug ate it all—and I got 
nuffin but a crust! And I asked for a orange—and—didn’t 
get it!” And the poor little fellow buried his face in Syl¬ 
vie’s lap, who kept gently stroking his hair, as she went 
on. “It’s all true, Professor dear! They do treat my darling 
Bruno very badly! And they’re not kind to me either,” 
she added in a lower tone, as if that were a thing of much 
less importance. 

The Professor got out a large red silk handkerchief, and 



A MUSICAL GARDENER 


341 

wiped his eyes. “I wish I could help you, dear children!” 
he said. “But what can I do?” 

“We know the way to Fairyland—where Father’s gone 
—quite well,” said Sylvie: “if only the Gardener would 
let us out.” 

"Won't he open the door for you?” said the Professor. 

“Not for us,” said Sylvie: “but I’m sure he would for 
you. Do come and ask him, Professor dear!” 

“I'll come this minute!” said the Professor. 

Bruno sat up and dried his eyes. “ Isn’t he kind, Mister 
Sir?” 

“He is indeed,” said I. But the Professor took no notice 
of my remark. He had put on a beautiful cap with a long 
tassel, and was selecting one of the Other Professor’s walk¬ 
ing sticks, from a stand in the corner of the room. “A 
thick stick in one’s hand makes people respectful,” he was 
saying to himself. “Come along, dear children!” And we 
all went out into the garden together. 

“I shall address him, first of all,” the Professor ex¬ 
plained as we went along, “with a few playful remarks on 
the weather. I shall then question him about the Other 
Professor. This will have a double advantage. First, it 
will open the conversation (you ca’n’t even drink a bottle 
of wine without opening it first): and secondly, if he’s seen 
the Other Professor, we shall find him that way: and, if he 
• hasn’t, we sha’n’t.” 

On our way, we passed the target, at which Uggug had 
been made to shoot during the Ambassador’s visit. 

“See!” said the Professor, pointing out a hole in the 
middle of the bull’s-eye. “His Imperial Fatness had only 
one shot at it; and he went in just here!” 

Bruno carefully examined the hole. “Couldn’t go in 
there,” he whispered to me. “He are too fat!” 

We had no sort of difficulty in finding the Gardener. 
Though he was hidden from us by some trees, that harsh 
voice of his served to direct us; and, as we drew nearer, 
the words of his song became more and more plainly 
audible: 



342 


SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


“He thought he saw an Albatross 
That fluttered round the lamp: 

He looked again, and found it was 
A Penny-Postage-Stamp. 

'You'd best be getting home,’ he said: 

‘The nights are very damp!’ ” 

“Would it be afraid of catching cold?” said Bruno. 

“If it got very damp”, Sylvie suggested, "it might stick 
to something, you know.” 

“And that somefin would have to go by the post, what¬ 
ever it was!” Bruno eagerly exclaimed. “Suppose it was a 
cow! Wouldn’t it be dreadful for the other things!” 

"And all these things happened to him,” said the Pro¬ 
fessor. “That’s what makes the song so interesting.” 

“He must have had a very curious life,” said Sylvie. 

“You may say that!” the Professor heartily rejoined. 

“Of course she may!” cried Bruno. 

By this time we had come up to the Gardener, who was 
standing on one leg, as usual, and busily employed in 
watering a bed of flowers with an empty watering-can. 

“It hasn’t got no water in it!” Bruno explained to him, 
pulling his sleeve to attract his attention. 

“It’s lighter to hold,” said the Gardener. “A lot of 
water in it makes one’s arms ache.” And he went on with 
his work, singing softly to himself 

“The nights are very damp!” 

“In digging things out of the ground—which you prob¬ 
ably do now and then,” the Professor began in a loud 
voice; "in making things into heaps—which no doubt you 
often do; and in kicking things about with one heel— 
which you seem never to leave off doing; have you ever 
happened to notice another Professor, something like me, 
but different?” 

“Never!” shouted the Gardener, so loudly and violently 
that we all drew back in alarm. “There ain’t such a 
thing!” 



A MUSICAL GARDENER 343 

“We will try a less exciting topic,’’ the Professor mildly 
remarked to the children. “You were asking-” 

“We asked him to let us through the garden-door,” 
said Sylvie: “but he wouldn’t: but perhaps he would for 
you!” 

The Professor put the request, very humbly and cour¬ 
teously, 

“I wouldn’t mind letting you out,” said the Gardener. 
“But I mustn’t open the door for children. D’you think 
I’d disobey the Rules? Not for one-and-sixpence!” 

The Professor cautiously produced a couple of shill¬ 
ings. 

“That’ll do it!” the Gardener shouted, as he hurled the 
watering-can across the flower-bed, and produced a hand¬ 
ful of keys—one large one, and a number of small ones. 

“But look here, Professor dear!” whispered Sylvie. “He 
needn’t open the door for us, at all. We can go out with 
you.” 

“True, dear child!” the Professor thankfully replied, as 
he replaced the coins in his pocket. “That saves two shill¬ 
ings!” And he took the children’s hands, that they might 
all go out together when the door was opened. This, how¬ 
ever, did not seem a very likely event, though the Gar¬ 
dener patiently tried all the small keys, over and over 
again. 

At last the Professor ventured on a gentle suggestion. 
“Why not try the large one? I have often observed that a 
door unlocks much more nicely with its own key.” 

The very first trial of the large key proved a success: 
the Gardener opened the door, and held out his hand for 
the money. 

The Professor shook his head. “You are acting by 
Rule ”, he explained, “in opening the door for me. And 
now it’s open, we are going out by Rule —the Rule of 
Three.” 

The Gardener looked puzzled, and let us go out; but, 
as he locked the door behind us, we heard him singing 
thoughtfully to himself: 



344 


SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


“He thought he sap a Garden-Door 
That opened with a key: 

He looked again, and found it was 
A Double Rule of Three: 

‘And all its mystery’, he said, 

'Is clear as day to me!’ ” 

"I shall now return,” said the Professor, when we had 
walked a few yards: “you see, it’s impossible to read here, 
for all my books are in the house. ” 

But the children still kept fast hold of his hands. “Do 
come with us!” Sylvie entreated with tears in her eyes. 

“Well, well!” said the good-natured old man. “Perhaps 
I’ll come after you, some day soon. But I must go back, 
now. You see I left off at a comma, and it’s so awkward 
not knowing how the sentence finishes! Besides, you’ve 
got to go through Dogland first, and I’m always a little 
nervous about dogs. But it’ll be quite easy to come, as 
soon as I’ve completed my new invention—for carrying 
one’s -self, you know. It wants just a little more working 
out.” 

“Won’t that be very tiring, to carry yourself?’’ Sylvie 
enquired. 

“Well, no, my child. You see, whatever fatigue one 
incurs by carrying, one saves by being carried! Good-bye, 
dears! Good-bye, Sir!” he added to my intense surprise, 
giving my hand an affectionate squeeze. 

“Good-bye, Professor!” I replied, but my voice sounded 
strange and far away, and the children took not the slight¬ 
est notice of our farewell. Evidently they neither saw me 
nor heard me, as, with their arms lovingly twined round 
each other, they marched boldly on. 



Chapter XIII 


A Visit to Dogland 

“There’s a house, away there to the left,’’ said Sylvie 
after we had walked what seemed to me about fifty miles. 
"Let’s go and ask for a night’s lodging.” 

“It looks a very comfable house,” Bruno said, as we 
turned into the road leading up to it. ‘I doos hope the 
Dogs will be kind to us, I is so tired and hungry!” 

A Mastiff, dressed in a scarlet collar, and carrying a 
musket, was pacing up and down, like a sentinel, in front 
of the entrance. He started, on catching sight of the chil¬ 
dren, and came forwards to meet them, keeping his mus¬ 
ket pointed straight at Bruno, who stood quite still, 
though he turned pale and kept tight hold of Sylvie’s 
hand, while the Sentinel walked solemnly round and 
round them, and looked at them from all points of view. 

“Oobooh, hooh boohooyah!” he growled at last. “Woo- 
bah yahwah oobooh! Bow wahbah woobooyah? Bow 
wow?” he asked Bruno, severely. 

Of course Bruno understood all this, easily enough. All 
Fairies understand Doggee—that is, Dog-language. But, 
as you may find it a little difficult, just at first, I had bet¬ 
ter put it into English for you. “Humans, I verily believe! 
A couple of stray Humans! What Dog do you belong to? 
What do you want?” 

“We don’t belong to a Dog!” Bruno began, in Doggee. 
(“Peoples never belongs to Dogs!” he whispered to Sylvie.) 

But Sylvie hastily checked him, for fear of hurting the 
Mastiff’s feelings. “Please, we want a little food, and a 
night’s lodging—if there's room in the house,” she added 
timidly. Sylvie spoke Doggee very prettily: but I think 
it’s almost better, for you, to give the conversation in 
English. 

“The house , indeed!” growled the Sentinel. “Have you 
never seen a Palace in your life? Come along with me! 
His Majesty must settle what’s to be done with you.” 

345 



346 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

They followed him through the entrance-hall, down a 
long passage, and into a magnificent Saloon, around 
which were grouped dogs of all sorts and sizes. Two 
splendid Blood-hounds were solemnly sitting up, one on 
each side of the crown-bearer. Two or three Bull-dogs— 
whom I guessed to be the Body-Guard of the King—were 
waiting in grim silence: in fact the only voices at all 
plainly audible were those of two little dogs, who had 
mounted a settee, and were holding a lively discussion 
that looked very like a quarrel. 

“Lords and Ladies in Waiting, and various Court Offi¬ 
cials,” our guide gruffly remarked, as he led us in. Of me 
the Courtiers took no notice whatever: but Sylvie and 
Bruno were the subject of many inquisitive looks, and 
many whispered remarks, of which I only distinctly 
caught one —made by a sly-looking Dachshund to his 
friend—“Bah wooh wahyah hoobah Oobooh, hah bah?” 
(“She’s not such a bad-looking Human, is she?”) 

Leaving the new arrivals in the centre of the Saloon, 
the Sentinel advanced to a door, at the further end of it, 
which bore an inscription, painted on it in Doggee, “Royal 
Kennel—Scratch and Yell.” 

Before doing this, the Sentinel turned to the children, 
and said “Give me your names.” 

“We’d rather not!” Bruno exclaimed, pulling Sylvie 
away from the door. “We want them ourselves. Come 
back, Sylvie! Come quick!” 

“Nonsense!” said Sylvie very decidedly: and gave their 
names in Doggee. 

Then the Sentinel scratched violently at the door, and 
gave a yell that made Bruno shiver from head to foot. 

“Hooyah wah!” said a deep voice inside. (That’s Dog¬ 
gee for “Come in!”) 

“It’s the King himself!” the Mastiff whispered in an 
awestruck tone. “Take off your wigs, and lay them 
humbly at his paws.” (What we should call “at his feet".) 

Sylvie was just going to explain, very politely, that 
really they couldn’t perform that ceremony, because their 



A VISIT TO DOGLAND 347 

wigs wouldn’t come off, when the door of the Royal 
Kennel opened, and an enormous Newfoundland Dog put 
his head out. “Bow wow?” was his first question. 

“When His Majesty speaks to you”, the Sentinel hastily 
whispered to Bruno, "you should prick up your ears!” 

Bruno looked doubtfully at Sylvie. “I’d rather not, 
please,” he said. “It would hurt.” 

“It doesn’t hurt a bit!” the Sentinel said with some 
indignation. “Look! It’s like this!” And he pricked up his 
ears like two railway signals. 

Sylvie gently explained matters. “I'm afraid we ca’n’t 
manage it,” she said in a low voice. “I’m very sorry: but 

our ears haven’t got the right-” she wanted to say 

“machinery” in Doggee: but she had forgotten the word, 
and could only think of “steam-engine”. 

The Sentinel repeated Sylvie’s explanation to the King. 

"Ca’n’t prick up their ears without a steam-engine!” 
His Majesty exclaimed. “They must be curious creatures! 
I must have a look at them!” And he came out of his 
Kennel, and walked solemnly up to the children. 

What was the amazement—not to say the horror—of 
the whole assembly, when Sylvie actually patted His 
Majesty on the head, while Bruno seized his long ears and 
pretended to tie them together under his chin! 

The Sentinel groaned aloud: a beautiful Greyhound— 
who appeared to be one of the Ladies in Waiting—fainted 
away: and all the other Courtiers hastily drew back, and 
left plenty of room for the huge Newfoundland to spring 
upon the audacious strangers, and tear them limb from 
limb. 

Only—he didn’t. On the contrary His Majesty actually 
smiled —so far as a Dog can smile—and (the other Dogs 
couldn’t believe their eyes, but it was true, all the same) 
His Majesty wagged his tail! 

“Yah! Hooh hahwooh!” (that is “Well! I never!”) was 
the universal cry. 

His Majesty looked round him severely, and gave a 
slight growl, which produced instant silence. “Conduct 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


348 

my friends to the banqueting-hall!” he said, laying such 
an emphasis on “my friends” that several of the dogs 
rolled over helplessly on their backs and began to lick 
Bruno’s feet. 

A procession was formed, but I only ventured to follow 
as far as the door of the banqueting-hall, so furious was 
the uproar of barking dogs within. So I sat down by the 
King, who seemed to have gone to sleep, and waited till 
the children returned to say good-night, when His 
Majesty got up and shook himself. 

“Time for bed!” he said with a sleepy yawn. “The 
attendants will show you your room,” he added, aside, to 
Sylvie and Bruno. “Bring lights!” And, with a dignified 
air, he held out his paw for them to kiss. 

But the children were evidently not well practised in 
Court-manners. Sylvie simply stroked the great paw: 
Bruno hugged it: the Master of Ceremonies looked 
shocked. 

All this time Dog-waiters, in splendid livery, were run¬ 
ning up with lighted candles: but, as fast as they put them 
upon the table, other waiters ran away with them, so that 
there never seemed to be one for me, though the Master 
kept nudging me with his elbow, and repeating “I ca’n’t 
let you sleep here! You’re not in bed, you know!” 

I made a great effort, and just succeeded in getting out 
the words “I know I’m not. I'm in an arm-chair.” 

“Well, forty winks will do you no harm,” the Master 
said, and left me. I could scarcely hear his words: and no 
wonder: he was leaning over the side of a ship, that was 
miles away from the pier on which I stood. The ship 
passed over the horizon, and I sank back into the arm¬ 
chair. 

The next thing I remember is that it was morning: 
breakfast was just over: Sylvie was lifting Bruno down 
from a high chair, and saying to a Spaniel, who was 
regarding them with a most benevolent smile, “Yes, thank 
you, we’ve had a very nice breakfast. Haven’t we, 
Bruno?” 



A VISIT TO DOGLAND 


349 

“There was too many bones in the-” Bruno began, 

but Sylvie frowned at him, and laid her finger on her lips, 
for, at this moment, the travelers were waited on by a 
very dignified officer, the Head-Growler, whose duty it 
was, first to conduct them to the King to bid him fare¬ 
well, and then to escort them to the boundary of Dogland. 
The great Newfoundland received them most affably, 
but, instead of saying “good-bye”, he startled the Head- 
Growler into giving three savage growls, by announcing 
that he would escort them himself. 

“It is a most unusual proceeding, your Majesty!” the 
Head-Growler exclaimed, almost choking with vexation 
at being set aside, for he had put on his best Court-suit, 
made entirely of cat-skins, for the occasion. 

“I shall escort them myself,” His Majesty repeated, 
gently but firmly, laying aside the Royal robes, and 
changing his crown for a small coronet, “and you may 
stay at home.” 

“I are glad!” Bruno whispered to Sylvie, when they 
had got well out of hearing. “He were so welly cross!” 
And he not only patted their Royal escort, but even 
hugged him round the neck in the exuberance of his 
delight. 

His Majesty calmly wagged the Royal tail. “It’s quite a 
relief”, he said, “getting away from that Palace now and 
then! Royal Dogs have a dull life of it, I can tell you! 
Would you mind” (this to Sylvie, in a low voice, and 
looking a little shy and embarrassed) “would you mind 
the trouble of just throwing that stick for me to fetch?” 

Sylvie was too much astonished to do anything for a 
moment: it sounded such a monstrous impossibility that a 
King should wish to run after a stick. But Bruno was 
equal to the occasion, and with a glad shout of “Hi then! 
Fetch it, good Doggie!” he hurled it over a clump of 
bushes. The next moment the Monarch of Dogland had 
bounded over the bushes, and picked up the stick, and 
came galloping back to the children with it in his mouth. 
Bruno took it from him with great decision. “Beg for it”! 



35 ® SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

he insisted; and His Majesty begged. “Paw!” commanded 
Sylvie; and His Majesty gave his paw. In short, the 
solemn ceremony of escorting the travelers to the 
boundaries of Dogland became one long uproarious game 
of play! 

"But business is business!” the Dog-King said at last. 
“And I must go back to mine. I couldn't come any fur¬ 
ther,” he added, consulting a dog-watch, which hung on a 
chain round his neck, “not even if there were a Cat in 
sight!” 

They took an affectionate farewell of His Majesty, and 
trudged on. 

"That were a dear dog!” Bruno exclaimed. “Has we to 
go far, Sylvie? I’s tired!” 

“Not much further, darling!” Sylvie gently replied. 
“Do you see that shining, just beyond those trees? I'm 
almost sure it’s the gate of Fairyland! I know it's all 
golden—Father told me so—and so bright, so bright!” 
she went on dreamily. 

“It dazzles!” said Bruno, shading his eyes with one 
little hand, while the other clung tightly to Sylvie’s hand, 
as if he were half-alarmed at her strange manner. 

For the child moved on as if walking in her sleep, her 
large eyes gazing into the far distance, and her breath 
coming and going in quick pantings of eager delight. I 
knew, by some mysterious mental light, that a great 
change was taking place in my sweet little friend (for 
such I loved to think her) and that she was passing from 
the condition of a mere Outland Sprite into the true 
Fairy-nature. 

Upon Bruno the change came later: but it was com¬ 
pleted in both before they reached the golden gate, 
through which I knew it would be impossible for me to 
follow. I could but stand outside, and take a last look at 
the two sweet children, ere they disappeared within, and 
the golden gate closed with a bang. 

And with such a bang! “It never will shut like any 
other cupboard-door,” Arthur explained. “There’s some- 



A VISIT TO DOGLAND 


351 

thing wrong with the hinge. However, here’s the cake 
and wine. And you’ve had your forty winks. So you 
really must get off to bed, old man! You’re fit for nothing 
else. Witness my hand, Arthur Forester, M.D.” 

By this time I was wide-awake again. “Not quite yet!” 
I pleaded. “Really I'm not sleepy now. And it isn’t mid¬ 
night yet.” 

“Well, I did want to say another word to you,” Arthur 
replied in a relenting tone, as he supplied me with the 
supper he had prescribed. “Only I thought you were too 
sleepy for it to-night.” 

We took our midnight meal almost in silence; for an 
unusual nervousness seemed to have seized on my old 
friend. 

“What kind of a night is it?” he asked, rising and un¬ 
drawing the window-curtains, apparently to change the 
subject for a minute. I followed him to the window, and 
we stood together, looking out, in silence. 

“When I first spoke to you about-” Arthur began, 

after a long and embarrassing silence, “that is, when we 
first talked about her—for I think it was you that intro¬ 
duced the subject—my own position in life forbade me to 
do more than worship her from a distance: and I was 
turning over plans for leaving this place finally, and 
settling somewhere out of all chance of meeting her again. 
That seemed to be my only chance of usefulness in life.” 

“Would that have been wise?” I said. “To leave your¬ 
self no hope at all? ” 

“There was no hope to leave,” Arthur firmly replied, 
though his eyes glittered with tears as he gazed upwards 
into the midnight sky, from which one solitary star, the 
glorious “Vega”, blazed out in fitful splendour through 
the driving clouds. “She was like that star to me—bright, 
beautiful, and pure, but out of reach, out of reach!” 

He drew the curtains again, and we returned to our 
places by the fireside. 

“What I wanted to tell you was this,” he resumed. “I 
heard this evening from my solicitor. I can’t go into the 



352 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

details of the business, but the upshot is that my worldly 
wealth is much more than I thought, and I am (or shall 
soon be) in a position to offer marriage, without imprud¬ 
ence, to any lady, even if she brought nothing, I doubt if 
there would be anything on her side: the Earl is poor, I 
believe. But I should have enough for both, even if health 
failed.” 

"I wish you all happiness in your married life!” I cried. 
“Shall you speak to the Earl to-morrow?” 

“Not yet awhile,” said Arthur. “He is very friendly, 
but I dare not think he means more than that, as yet. 
And as for—as for Lady Muriel, try as I may, I cannot 
read her feelings towards me. If there is love, she is 
hiding it! No, I must wait, I must wait!” 

I did not like to press any further advice on my friend, 
whose judgment, I felt, was so much more sober and 
thoughtful than my own; and we parted without more 
words on the subject that had now absorbed his thoughts, 
nay, his very life. 

The next morning a letter from my solicitor arrived, 
summoning me to town on important business. 


Chapter XIV 
Fairy-Sylvie 

For a full month the business, for which I had returned 
to London, detained me there: and even then it was only 
the urgent advice of my physician that induced me to 
leave it unfinished and pay another visit to Elveston. 

Arthur had written once or twice during the month; 
but in none of his letters was there any mention of Lady 
Muriel. Still, I did not augur ill from his silence: to me it 
looked like the natural action of a lover, who, even while 
his heart was singing “She is mine”, would fear to paint 



FAIRY-SYLVIE 


353 

his happiness in the cold phrases of a written letter, but 
would wait to tell it by word of mouth. “Yes,” I thought, 
“I am to hear his song of triumph from his own lips!” 

The night I arrived we had much to say on other 
matters: and, tired with the journey, I went to bed early, 
leaving the happy secret still untold. Next day, however, 
as we chatted on over the remains of luncheon, I ven¬ 
tured to put the momentous question. “Well, old friend, 
you have told me nothing of Lady Muriel—nor when the 
happy day is to be?” 

“The happy day”, Arthur said, looking unexpectedly 
grave, “is yet in the dim future. We need to know—or, 
rather, she needs to know me better. I know her sweet 
nature, thoroughly, by this time. But I dare not speak 
till I am sure that my love is returned.” 

“Don’t wait too long!” I said gaily. “Faint heart never 
won fair lady!” 

"It is ‘faint heart’ perhaps. But really I dare not speak 
just yet.” 

"But meanwhile”, I pleaded, “you are running a risk 
that perhaps you have not thought of. Some other 
man-” 

“No,” said Arthur firmly. “She is heart-whole: I am 
sure of that. Yet, if she loves another better than me, so 
be it! I will not spoil her happiness. The secret shall die 
with me. But she is my first—and my only love!” 

“That is all very beautiful sentiment ,” I said, “but it is 
not practical. It is not likeyow. 

He either fears his fate too much 
Or his desert is small. 

Who dares not put it to the touch, 

To win or lose it all.” 

“I dare not ask the question whether there is another!” 
he said passionately. “It would break my heart to know 
it!” 

“Yet is it wise to leave it unasked? You must not waste 
your life upon an ‘if’!’’ 



354 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

"I tell you I dare not!” 

"May I find it out for you?” I asked, with the freedom 
of an old friend. 

"No, no!” he replied with a pained look. "I entreat you 
to say nothing. Let it wait.” 

"As you please,” I said: and judged it best to say no 
more just then. "But this evening”, I thought, "I will call 
on the Earl. I may be able to see how the land lies, with¬ 
out so much as saying a word! ” 

It was a very hot afternoon—too hot to go for a walk 
or do anything—or else it wouldn’t have happened, I 
believe. 

In the first place, I want to know—dear Child who 
reads this!—why Fairies should always be teaching us to 
do our duty, and lecturing us when we go wrong, and we 
should never teach them anything? You can’t mean to 
say that Fairies are never greedy, or selfish, or cross, or 
deceitful, because that would be nonsense, you know. 
Well then, don’t you think they might be all the better 
for a little lecturing and punishing now and then? 

I really don’t see why it shouldn’t be tried, and I'm 
almost sure that, if you could only catch a Fairy, and put 
it in the corner, and give it nothing but bread and water 
for a day or two, you'd find it quite an improved character 
—it would take down its conceit a little, at all events. 

The next question is, what is the best time for seeing 
Fairies? I believe I can tell you all about that. 

The first rule is, that it must be a very hot day—that we 
may consider as settled: and you must be just a little 
sleepy—but not too sleepy to keep your eyes open, mind. 
Well, and you ought to feel a little—what one may call 
"fairyish”—the Scotch call it "eerie”, and perhaps that’s 
a prettier word; if you don't know what it means, I’m 
afraid I can hardly explain it; you must wait till you meet 
a Fairy, and then you'll know. 

And the last rule is, that the crickets should not be 
chirping. I can’t stop to explain that: you must take it on 
trust for the present. 



FAIR Y-SYLVIE 


355 

So, if all these things happen together, you have a good 
chance of seeing a Fairy—or at least a much better chance 
than if they didn’t. 

The first thing I noticed, as I went lazily along through 
an open place in the wood, was a large Beetle lying 
struggling on its back, and I went down upon one knee to 1 
help the poor thing to its feet again. In some things, you 
know, you ca’n’t be quite sure what an insect would like: 
for instance, I never could quite settle, supposing I were a 
moth, whether I would rather be kept out of the candle, 
or be allowed to fly straight in and get burnt—or again, 
supposing I were a spider, I’m not sure if I should be quite 
pleased to have my web torn down, and the fly let loose— 
but I feel quite certain that, if I were a beetle and had 
rolled over on my back, I should always be glad to be 
helped up again. 

So, as I was saying, I had gone down upon one knee 
and was just reaching out a little stick to turn the Beetle 
over, when I saw a sight that made me draw back hastily 
and hold my breath, for fear of making any noise and 
frightening the little creature away. 

Not that she looked as if she would be easily frightened: 
she seemed so good and gentle that I’m sure she would 
never expect that any one could wish to hurt her. She was 
only a few inches high, and was dressed in green, so that 
you really would hardly have noticed her among the long 
grass; and she was so delicate and graceful that she quite 
seemed to belong to the place, almost as if she were one of 
the flowers. I may tell you, besides, that she had no wings 
(I don’t believe in Fairies with wings), and that she had 
quantities of long brown hair and large earnest brown 
eyes, and then I shall have done all I can to give you an 
idea of her. 

Sylvie (I found out her name afterwards) had knelt 
down, just as I was doing, to help the Beetle; but it 
needed more than a little stick for her to get it on its legs 
again; it was as much as she could do, with both arms, to 
roll the heavy thing over; and all the while she was talk- 



356 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

ing to it, half scolding and half comforting, as a nurse 
might do with a child that had fallen down. 

“There, there! You needn’t cry so much about it. 
You’re not killed yet—though if you were, you couldn’t 
cry, you know, and so it’s a general rule against crying, 
my dear! And how did you come to tumble over? But I 
can see well enough how it was—I needn’t ask you that— 
walking over sand-pits with your chin in the air, as usual. 
Of course if you go among sand-pits like that, you must 
expect to tumble. You should look.” 

The Beetle murmured something that sounded like “I 
did look,” and Sylvie went on again. 

“But I know you didn’t! You never do! You always 
walk with your chin up—you’re so dreadfully conceited. 
Well, let’s see how many legs are broken this time. Why, 
none of them, I declare! And what’s the good of having 
six legs, my dear, if you can only kick them all about in 
the air when you tumble? Legs are meant to walk with, 
you know. Now don’t begin putting out your wings yet; 
I’ve more to say. Go to the frog that lives behind that 
buttercup—give him my compliments—Sylvie’s compli¬ 
ments—can you say ‘compliments’?” 

The Beetle tried, and, I suppose, succeeded. 

“Yes, that’s right. And tell him he’s to give you some of 
that salve I left with him yesterday. And you’d better get 
him to rub it in for you. He's got rather cold hands, but 
you mustn’t mind that.” 

I think the Beetle must have shuddered at this idea, for 
Sylvie went on in a graver tone. “Now you needn’t pre¬ 
tend to be so particular as all that, as if you were too 
grand to be rubbed by a frog. The fact is, you ought to be 
very much obliged to him. Suppose you could get nobody 
but a toad to do it, how would you like that?” 

There was a little pause, and then Sylvie added “Now 
you may go. Be a good beetle, and don’t keep your chin 
in the air.” And then began one of those performances of 
humming, and whizzing, and restless banging about, such 
as a beetle indulges in when it has decided to flying, bun 



F AIR Y-S YLVIE 


357 

hasn’t quite made up its mind which way to go. At last, 
in one of its awkward zig-zags, it managed to fly right 
into my face, and, by the time I had recovered from the 
shock, the little Fairy was gone. 

I looked about in all directions for the little creature, 
but there was no trace of her—and my “eerie” feeling was 
quite gone off, and the crickets were chirping again 
merrily—so I knew she was really gone. 

And now I’ve got time to tell you the rule about the 
crickets. They always leave off chirping when a Fairy goes 
by—because a Fairy's a kind of queen over them, I sup¬ 
pose—at all events it's a much grander thing than a 
cricket—so whenever you’re walking out, and the crickets 
suddenly leave off chirping, you may be sure that they 
see a Fairy. 

I walked on sadly enough, you may be sure. However, I 
comforted myself with thinking “It’s been a very wonder¬ 
ful afternoon, so far. I’ll just go quietly on and look about 
me, and I shouldn’t wonder if I were to come across 
another Fairy somewhere.” 

Peering about in this way, I happened to notice a plant 
with rounded leaves, and with queer little holes cut in the 
middle of several of them. "Ah, the leafcutter bee! ’ I 
carelessly remarked—you know I am very learned in 
Natural History (for instance, I can always tell kittens 
from chickens at one glance)—and I was passing on, when 
a sudden thought made me stoop down and examine the 
leaves. 

Then a little thrill of delight ran through me—for I 
noticed that the holes were all arranged so as to form 
letters; there were three leaves side by side, with “B”, 
“R”, and “U” marked on them, and after some search 
I found two more, which contained an “N” and an 
“ 0 ”. 

And then, all in a moment, a flash of inner light seemed 
to illumine a part of my life that had all but faded into 
oblivion—the strange visions I had experienced during 
my journey to Elveston: and with a thrill of delight I 



358 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

thought “Those visions are destined to be linked with my 
waking life!” 

By this time the “eerie” feeling had come back again, 
and I suddenly observed that no crickets were chirping, so 
I felt quite sure that “Bruno” was somewhere very near. 

And so indeed he was—so near that I had very nearly 
walked over him without seeing him; which would have 
been dreadful, always supposing that Fairies can be 
walked over—my own belief is that they are something of 
the nature of Will-o’-the-Wisps: and there’s no walking 
over them. 

Think of any pretty little boy you know, with rosy 
cheeks, large dark eyes, and tangled brown hair, and then 
fancy him made small enough to go comfortably into a 
coffee-cup, and you’ll have a very fair idea of him. 

“What’s you name, little one?” I began, in as soft a 
voice as I could manage. And, by the way, why is it we 
always begin by asking little children their names? Is it 
because we fancy a name will help to make them a little 
bigger? You never thought of asking a real large man his 
name, now, did you? But, however that may be, I felt it 
quite necessary to know his name; so, as he didn’t answer 
my question, I asked it again a little louder. “What’s your 
name, my little man?” 

“What’s oors?” he said, without looking up. 

I told him my name quite gently, for he was much too 
small to be angry with. 

“Duke of Anything?” he asked, just looking at me for 
a moment, and then going on with his work. 

“Not Duke at all,” I said, a little ashamed of having to 
confess it. 

“Oo’re big enough to be two Dukes,” said the little 
creature. “I suppose oo’re Sir Something, then?” 

“No,” I said, feeling more and more ashamed. "I 
haven't got any title.” 

The Fairy seemed to think that in that case I really 
wasn’t worth the trouble of talking to, for he quietly went 
on digging, and tearing the flowers to pieces. 



FAIRY-SYLVIE 359 

After a few minutes I tried again. “Please tell me what 
your name is.” 

“Bruno,” the little fellow answered, very readily. 
“Why didn’t oo say ‘please’ before?” 

“That's something like what we used to be taught in 
the nursery,” I thought to myself, looking back through 
the long years (about a hundred of them, since you ask 
the question), to the time when I was a little child. 
And here an idea came into my head, and I asked him 
“Aren’t you one of the Fairies that teach children to be 
good?” 

“Well, we have to do that sometimes,” said Bruno, 
“and a dreadful bother it is.” As he said this, he savagely 
tore a heartsease in two, and trampled on the pieces. 

“What are you doing there, Bruno?” I said. 

“Spoiling Sylvie’s garden,” was all the answer Bruno 
would give at first. But, as he went on tearing up the 
flowers, he muttered to himself “The nasty cross thing— 
wouldn’t let me go and play this morning—said I must 
finish my lessons first—lessons, indeed! I’ll vex her finely, 
though!” 

“Oh, Bruno, you shouldn’t do that!” I cried. “Don’t 
you know that’s revenge? And revenge is a wicked, cruel, 
dangerous thing!” 

“River-edge?” said Bruno. “What a funny word! I 
suppose oo call it cruel and dangerous ’cause, if oo wented 
too far and tumbleded in, oo’d get drownded.” 

“No, not river-edge,” I explained: “revenge” (saying 
the word very slowly). But I couldn’t help thinking that 
Bruno’s explanation did very well for either word. 

“Oh!” said Bruno, opening his eyes very wide, but 
without trying to repeat the word. 

“Come! Try to pronounce it, Bruno!” I said, cheerfully. 
“Re-venge, re-venge.” 

But Bruno only tossed his little head, and said he 
couldn’t; that his mouth wasn’t the right shape for words 
of that kind. And the more I laughed, the more sulky the 
little fellow got about it. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


360 

“Well, never mind, my little man!” I said. “Shall I 
help you with that job?” 

“Yes, please,” Bruno said, quite pacified. “Only I wiss 
I could think of somefin to vex her more than this. Oo 
don’t know how hard it is to make her angry!” 

“Now listen to me, Bruno, and I’ll teach you quite a 
splendid kind of revenge!” 

"Somefin that’ll vex her finely?” he asked with gleam¬ 
ing eyes. 

“Something that will vex her finely. First, we’ll get up 
all the weeds in her garden. See, there are a good many at 
this end—quite hiding the flowers.” 

“But that won’t vex her!” said Bruno. 

“After that”, I said, without noticing the remark, 
“we’ll water this highest bed—up here. You see it’s 
getting quite dry and dusty.” 

Bruno looked at me inquisitively, but he said nothing 
this time. 

“Then after that,” I went on, “the walks want sweep¬ 
ing a bit; and I think you might cut down that tall nettle 
■—it’s so close to the garden that it’s quite in the way-” 

“What is 00 talking about?” Bruno impatiently inter¬ 
rupted me. “All that won’t vex her a bit!” 

“Won’t it?” I said, innocently. “Then, after that, sup¬ 
pose we put in some of those coloured pebbles—just to 
mark the divisions between the different kinds of flowers, 
you know. That'll have a very pretty effect.” 

Bruno turned round and had another good stare at me. 
At last there came an odd little twinkle into his eyes, and 
he said, with quite a new meaning in his voice, “That’ll 
do nicely. Let’s put ’em in rows—all the red together, and 
all the blue together.” 

“That’ll do capitally,” I said; “and then—what kind of 
flowers does Sylvie like best?” 

Bruno had to put his thumb in his mouth and consider 
a little before he could answer. "Violets,” he said, at last. 

“There’s a beautiful bed of violets down by the 
brook- 



FAIRY-SYLVIE 


361 

“Oh, let's fetch ’em!” cried Bruno, giving a little skip 
into the air. “Here! Catch hold of my hand, and I’ll help 
00 along. The grass is rather thick down that way.” 

I couldn’t help laughing at his having so entirely for¬ 
gotten what a big creature he was talking to. “No, not 
yet, Bruno,” I said: "we must consider what’s the right 
thing to do first. You see we’ve got quite a business 
before us.” 

"Yes, let’s consider,” said Bruno, putting his thumb 
into his mouth again, and sitting down upon a dead mouse. 

“What do you keep that mouse for?” I said. “You 
should either bury it, or else throw it into the brook.” 

“Why, it’s to measure with!” cried Bruno. “How ever 
would 00 do a garden without one? We make each bed 
three mouses and a half long, and two mouses wide.” 

I stopped him, as he was dragging it off by the tail to 
show me how it was used, for I was half afraid the “eerie” 
feeling might go off before we had finished the garden, 
and in that case I should see no more of him or Sylvie. “I 
think the best way will be for you to weed the beds, while 
I sort out these pebbles, ready to mark the walks with.” 

“That’s it!” cried Bruno. “And I’ll tell 00 about the 
caterpillars while we work.” 

“Ah, let’s hear about the caterpillars,” I said as I drew 
the pebbles together into a heap and began dividing them 
into colours. 

And Bruno went on in a low, rapid tone, more as if he 
were talking to himself. “Yesterday I saw two little cater¬ 
pillars, when I was sitting by the brook, just where 00 go 
into the wood. They were quite green, and they had 
yellow eyes, and they didn't see me. And one of them had 
got a moth’s wing to carry—a great brown moth’s wing, 
00 know, all dry, with feathers. So he couldn't want it to 
eat, I should think—perhaps he meant to make a cloak for 
the winter?” 

“Perhaps,” I said, for Bruno had twisted up the last 
word into a sort of question, and was looking at me for an 
answer. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


362 

One word was quite enough for the little fellow, and he 
went on merrily. "Well, and so he didn’t want the other 
caterpillar to see the moth’s wing, 00 know—so what 
must he do but try to carry it with all his left legs, and he 
tried to walk on the other set. Of course he toppled over 
after that." 

"After what?” I said, catching at the last word, for, to 
tell the truth, I hadn’t been attending much. 

"He toppled over,” Bruno repeated, very gravely, "and 
if 00 ever saw a caterpillar topple over, oo'd know it's a 
welly serious thing, and not sit grinning like that—and I 
sha’n’t tell 00 no more!” 

"Indeed and indeed, Bruno, I didn’t mean to grin. See, 
I’m quite grave again now.” 

But Bruno only folded his arms, and said "Don’t tell 
me. I see a little twinkle in one of oor eyes—just like the 
moon.” 

"Why do you think I’m like the moon, Bruno?” I 
asked. 

"Oor face is large and round like the moon,” Bruno 
answered, looking at me thoughtfully. "It doesn’t shine 
quite so bright—but it’s more cleaner.” 

I couldn’t help smiling at this. "You know I sometimes 
wash my face, Bruno. The moon never does that.” 

"Oh, doosn’t she though!” cried Bruno; and he leant 
forwards and added in a solemn whisper, "The moon’s 
face gets dirtier and dirtier every night, till it's black all 
across. And then, when it’s dirty all over— so —” (he 
passed his hand across his own rosy cheeks as he spoke) 
"then she washes it.” 

"Then it’s all clean again, isn’t it?” 

"Not all in a moment,” said Bruno. "What a deal of 
teaching 00 wants! She washes it little by little—only she 
begins at the other edge, 00 know. 

By this time he was sitting quietly on the dead mouse 
with his arms folded, and the weeding wasn’t getting on a 
bit: so I had to say "Work first, pleasure afterwards: no 
more talking till that bed’s finished.” 



Chapter XV 


Bruno’s Revenge 

After that we had a few minutes of silence, while I 
sorted out the pebbles, and amused myself with watching 
Bruno’s plan of gardening. It was quite a new plan to me: 
he always measured each bed before he weeded it, as if he 
was afraid the weeding would make it shrink; and once, 
when it came out longer than he wished, he set to work to 
thump the mouse with his little fist, crying out "There 
now! It’s all gone wrong again! Why don’t oo keep oor 
tail straight when I tell oo!’’ 

"I'll tell oo what I’ll do,” Bruno said in a half-whis¬ 
per, as we worked. "Oo like Fairies, don’t oo?” 

"Yes,” I said: “of course I do, or I shouldn’t have come 
here. I should have gone to some place where there are no 
Fairies.” 

Bruno laughed contemptuously. "Why, oo might as 
well say oo’d go to some place where there wasn’t any air 
—supposing oo didn’t like air!” 

This was a rather difficult idea to grasp. I tried a 
change of subject. "You’re nearly the first Fairy I ever 
saw. Ha veyou ever seen any people besides me?” 

"Plenty!” said Bruno. "We see ’em when we walk in 
the road.” 

"But they ca’n’t see you. How is it they never tread on 
you?” 

"Ca’n’t tread on us,” said Bruno, looking amused at my 
ignorance. "Why, suppose oo’re walking, here—so—” 
(making little marks on the ground) "and suppose there’s 
a Fairy—that’s me—walking here. Very well then, oo put 
one foot here, and one foot here, and so oo doesn’t tread 
on the Fairy.” 

This was all very well as an explanation, but it didn’t 
convince me. "Why shouldn’t I put one foot on the 
Fairy?” I asked. 

"I don’t know why," the little fellow said in a thought- 

363 



364 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

ful tone. "But I know 00 wouldn't. Nobody never walked 
on the top of a Fairy. Now I’ll tell 00 what I’ll do, as 
oo’re so fond of Fairies. I’ll get 00 an invitation to the 
Fairy-King’s dinner-party. I know one of the head- 
waiters.’’ 

I couldn’t help laughing at this idea. "Do the waiters 
invite the guests?’’ I asked. 

"Oh, not to sit down!" Bruno said. "But to wait at 
table. Oo’d like that, wouldn't 00? To hand about plates, 
and so on." 

“Well, but that’s not so nice as sitting at the table, 
is it?" 

"Of course it isn’t," Bruno said, in a tone as if he rather 
pitied my ignorance; "but if oo’re not even Sir Anything, 
00 ca’n’t expect to be allowed to sit at the table, 00 know.” 

I said, as meekly as I could, that I didn’t expect it, but 
it was the only way of going to a dinner-party that I 
really enjoyed. And Bruno tossed his head, and said, in a 
rather offended tone, that I might do as I pleased—there 
were many he knew that would give their ears to go. 

"Have you ever been yourself, Bruno?" 

"They invited me once, last week," Bruno said, very 
gravely. “It was to wash up the soup-plates—no, the 
cheese-plates I mean—that was grand enough. And I 
waited at table. And I didn't hardly make only one 
mistake.” 

"What was it?" I said. "You needn’t mind telling me” 

"Only bringing scissors to cut the beef with," Bruno 
said carelessly. “But the grandest thing of all was, I 
fetched the King a glass of cider!” 

"That was grand!" I said, biting my lip to keep myself 
from laughing. 

"Wasn’t it?” said Bruno, very earnestly. “Oo know it 
isn’t every one that’s had such an honour as that!” 

This set me thinking of the various queer things we 
call “an honour” in this world, but which, after all, have¬ 
n't a bit more honour in them than what Bruno enjoyed, 
when he took the King a glass of cider. 



BRUNO'S REVENGE 


365 

I don’t know how long I might not have dreamed on in 
this way, if Bruno hadn’t suddenly roused me. “Oh, come 
here quick!” he cried, in a state of the wildest excitement. 
“Catch hold of his other horn! I ca’n’t hold him more than 
a minute!” 

He was struggling desperately with a great snail, cling¬ 
ing to one of its horns, and nearly breaking his poor little 
back in his efforts to drag it over a blade of grass. 

I saw we should have no more gardening if I let this 
sort of thing go on, so I quietly took the snail away, and 
put it on a bank where he couldn’t reach it. “We’ll hunt 
it afterwards, Bruno,” I said, “if you really want to catch 
it. But what’s the use of it when you’ve got it ? ” 

“What’s the use of a fox when 00’ve got it?” said 
Bruno. “I know 00 big things hunt foxes.” 

I tried to think of some good reason why “big things” 
should hunt foxes, and he should not hunt snails, but none 
came into my head: so I said at last, “Well, I suppose one's 
as good as the other. I’ll go snail-hunting myself some 
day.” 

“I should think 00 wouldn't be so silly”, said Bruno, “as 
to go snail-hunting by oorself. Why, oo’d never get the 
snail along, if 00 hadn't somebody to hold on to his other 
horn!” 

“Of course I sha’n’t go alone,” I said, quite gravely. 
“By the way, is that the best kind to hunt, or do you re¬ 
commend the ones without shells?” 

“Oh, no, we never hunt the ones without shells,” Bruno 
said, with a little shudder at the thought of it. “They’re 
always so cross about it; and then, if 00 tumbles over 
them, they’re ever so sticky!” 

By this time we had nearly finished the garden. I had 
fetched some violets, and Bruno was just helping me to 
put in the last, when he suddenly stopped and said “I’m 
tired.” 

“Rest then,” I said: “I can go on without you, quite 

wen.” 

Bruno needed no second invitation: he at once began 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


366 

arranging the dead mouse as a kind of sofa. “And I’ll sing 
00 a little song,” he said, as he rolled it about. 

“Do,” said I: "I like songs very much.” 

“Which song will 00 choose?” Bruno said, as he drag¬ 
ged the mouse into a place where he could get a good view 
of me. “ ‘Ting, ting, ting’ is the nicest.” 

There was no resisting such a strong hint as this: how¬ 
ever, I pretended to think about it for a moment, and then 
said “Well, I like ‘Ting, ting, ting’ best of all.” 

“That shows oo’re a good judge of music,” Bruno said, 
with a pleased look. “How many hare-bells would 00 
like?” And he put his thumb into his mouth to help me 
to consider. 

As there was only one cluster of hare-bells within easy 
reach, I said very gravely that I thought one would do 
this time, and I picked it and gave it to him. Bruno ran 
his hand once or twice up and down the flowers, like a 
musician trying an instrument, producing a most deli¬ 
cious delicate tinkling as he did so. I had never heard 
flower-music before—I don’t think one can, unless one’s 
in the “eerie” state—and I don’t know quite how to give 
you an idea of what it was like, except by saying that it 
sounded like a peal of bells a thousand miles off. When he 
had satisfied himself that the flowers were in tune, he 
seated himself on the dead mouse (he never seemed really 
comfortable anywhere else), and, looking up at me 
with a merry twinkle in his eyes, he began. By the way, 
the tune was rather a curious one, and you might like to 
try it yourself, so here are the notes. 















BRUNO’S REVENGE 


367 


“Rise, oh, rise! The daylight dies: 

The owls are hooting, ting, ting, ting! 

Wake, oh, wake! Beside the lake 

The elves are fluting, ting, ting, ting! 

Welcoming our Fairy King, 

We sing, sing, sing.” 

He sang the first four lines briskly and merrily, making 
the hare-bells chime in time with the music; but the last 
two he sang quite slowly and gently, and merely waved 
the flowers backwards and forwards. Then he left off to 
explain. “The Fairy-King is Oberon, and he lives across 
the lake—and sometimes he comes in a little boat—and 
we go and meet him—and then we sing this song, you 
know.” 

“And then you go and dine with him?” I said, mis¬ 
chievously. 

"Oo shouldn’t talk,” Bruno hastily said: “it interrupts 
the song so.” 

I said I wouldn’t do it again. 

“I never talk myself when I’m singing,” he went on 
very gravely: “so 00 shouldn’t either.” Then he tuned 
the hare-bells once more, and sang: 

“Hear, oh, hear! From far and near 
The music stealing, ting, ting, ting! 

Fairy bells adown the dells 

Are merrily pealing, ting, ting, ting! 

Welcoming our Fairy King, 

We ring, ring, ring. 

“See, oh, see! On every tree 

What lamps are shining, ting, ting, ting! 

They are eyes of fiery flies 

To light our dining, ting, ting, ting! 

Welcoming our Fairy King 
They swing, swing, swing. 

“Haste, oh, haste, to take, and taste 

The dainties waiting, ting, ting, ting( 

Honey-dew is stored -” 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


368 

“Hush, Bruno!” I interrupted in a warning whisper. 
“She’s coming!” 

Bruno checked his song, and, as she slowly made her 
way through the long grass, he suddenly rushed out head¬ 
long at her like a little bull, shouting “Look the other 
way! Look the other way!” 

“Which way?” Sylvie asked, in rather a frightened 
tone, as she looked round in all directions to see where the 
danger could be. 

“That way!” said Bruno, carefully turning her round 
with her face to the wood. “Now, walk backwards—walk 
gently—don’t be frightened: 00 sha’n’t trip!” 

But Sylvie did trip notwithstanding: in fact he led her, 
in his hurry, across so many little sticks and stones, that it 
was really a wonder the poor child could keep on her feet 
at all. But he was far too much excited to think of what he 
was doing. 

I silently pointed out to Bruno the best place to lead her 
to, so as to get a view of the whole garden at once: it was 
a little rising ground, about the height of a potato; and, 
when they had mounted it, I drew back into the shade, 
that Sylvie mightn’t see me. 

I heard Bruno cry out triumphantly “Now 00 may 
look!” and then followed a clapping of hands, but it was 
all done by Bruno himself. Sylvie was silent—she only 
stood and gazed with her hands clasped together, and I 
was half afraid she didn’t like it after all. 

Bruno too was watching her anxiously, and when she 
jumped down off the mound, and began wandering up 
and down the little walks, he cautiously followed her 
about, evidently anxious that she should form her own 
opinion of it all, without any hint from him. And when 
at last she drew a long breath, and gave her verdict—in a 
hurried whisper, and without the slightest regard to 
grammar—“It’s the loveliest thing as I never saw in all 
my life before!” the little fellow looked as well pleased as 
if it had been given by all the judges and juries in Eng¬ 
land put together. 



BRUNO’S REVENGE 369 

“And did you really do it all by yourself, Bruno?’’ said 
Sylvie. “And all for me?’’ 

“I was helped a bit,’’ Bruno began, with a merry little 
laugh at her surprise. “We’ve been at it all the afternoon 

—I thought oo’d like-” and here the poor little fellow's 

lip began to quiver, and all in a moment he burst out cry¬ 
ing, and running up to Sylvie he flung his arms passion¬ 
ately round her neck, and hid his face on her shoulder. 

There was a little quiver in Sylvie’s voice too, as she 
whispered “Why, what’s the matter, darling?” and tried 
to lift up his head and kiss him. 

But Bruno only clung to her, sobbing, and wouldn’t be 
comforted till he had confessed. “I tried—to spoil oor gar¬ 
den—first—but I’ll never—never-” and then came 

another burst of tears, which drowned the rest of the sen¬ 
tence. At last he got out the words “I liked—putting in 
the flowers—for 00, Sylvie—and I never was so happy be¬ 
fore.” And the rosy little face came up at last to be kissed, 
all wet with tears as it was. 

Sylvie was crying too by this time, and she said nothing 
but “Bruno, dear!” and “I never was so happy before,” 
though why these two children who had never been so 
happy before should both be crying was a mystery to me. 

I felt very happy too, but of course I didn’t cry: "big 
things” never do, you know—we leave all that to the 
Fairies. Only I think it must have been raining a little just 
then, for I found a drop or two on my cheeks. 

After that they went through the whole garden again, 
flower by flower, as if it were a long sentence they were 
spelling out, with kisses for commas, and a great hug by 
way of a full-stop when they got to the end. 

“Doos 00 know, that was my river-edge, Sylvie?” 
Bruno solemnly began. 

Sylvie laughed merrily. “What do you mean?” she said. 
And she pushed back her heavy brown hair with both 
hands, and looked at him with dancing eyes in which the 
big tear-drops were still glittering. 

Bruno drew in a long breath, and made up his mouth for 

N L*C, 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


370 

a great effort. “I mean re—venge,” he said: "now 00 un¬ 
der’tand.’’ And he looked so happy and proud at having 
said the word right at last, that I quite envied him. I ra¬ 
ther think Sylvie didn’t "under’tand” at all; but she gave 
him a little kiss on each cheek, which seemed to do just as 
well. 

So they wandered off lovingly together, in among the 
buttercups, each with an arm twined round the other, 
whispering and laughing as they went, and never so much 
as once looked back at poor me. Yes, once, just before I 
quite lost sight of them, Bruno half turned his head, and 
nodded me a saucy little good-bye over one shoulder. And 
that was all the thanks I got for my trouble. The very last 
thing I saw of them was this—Sylvie was stooping down 
with her arms round Bruno’s neck, and saying coaxingly 
in his ear, ‘‘Do you know, Bruno, I’ve quite forgotten that 
hard word. Do say it once more. Come! Only this once, 
dear!” 

But Bruno wouldn’t try it again. 


Chapter XVI 
A Changed Crocodile 

The Marvellous—the Mysterious—had quite passed out 
of my life for the moment: and the Common-place reigned 
supreme. I turned in the direction of the Earl’s house, 
as it was now "the witching hour” of five, and I knew I 
should find them ready for a cup of tea and a quiet chat. 

Lady Muriel and her father gave me a delightfully 
warm welcome. They were not of the folk we meet in 
fashionable drawing-rooms—who conceal all such feel¬ 
ings as they may chance to possess beneath the impene¬ 
trable mask of a conventional placidity. "The Man with 
the Iron Mask” was, no doubt, a rarity and a marvel in his 
own age: in modern London no one would turn his head 
to give him a second look! No, these were real people. 



A CHANGED CROCODILE 


371 

When they looked pleased, it meant that they were pleased: 
and when Lady Muriel said, with a bright smile, “I'm 
very glad to see you again!” I knew that it was true. 

Still I did not venture to disobey the injunctions—crazy 
as I felt them to be—of the love-sick young Doctor, by so 
much as alluding to his existence: and it was only after 
they had given me full details of a projected Picnic, to 
which they invited me, that Lady Muriel exclaimed, al¬ 
most as an after-thought, “and do, if you can, bring Doc¬ 
tor Forester with you! I’m sure a day in the country 
would do him good. I’m afraid he studies too much-” 

It was “on the tip of my tongue” to quote the words 
“His only books are woman's looks!” but I checked my¬ 
self just in time—with something of the feeling of one 
who has crossed a street, and has been all but run over by 
a passing “Hansom”. 

“—and I think he has too lonely a life,” she went on, 
with a gentle earnestness that left no room whatever to 
suspect a double meaning. “Do get him to come! And 
don’t forget the day, Tuesday week. We can drive you 
over. It would be a pity to go by rail—there is so much 
pretty scenery on the road. And our open carriage just 
holds four.” 

“Oh, I’ll persuade him to come!” I said with confidence 
—thinking “it would take all my powers of persuasion to 
keep him away!” 

The Picnic was to take place in ten days: and though 
Arthur readily accepted the invitation I brought him, 
nothing that I could say would induce him to call—either 
with me or without me—on the Earl and his daughter in 
the meanwhile. No: he feared to “wear out his welcome”, 
he said: they had “seen enough of him for one while”: 
and, when at last the day for the expedition arrived, he 
was so childishly nervous and uneasy that I thought it 
best so to arrange our plans that we should go separately 
to the house—my intention being to arrive some time 
after him, so as to give him time to get over a meeting. 

With this object I purposely made a considerable circuit 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


372 

on my way to the Hall (as we called the Earl’s house): 
“and if I could only manage to lose my way a bit,” I 
thought to myself, “that would suit me capitally!” 

In this I succeeded better, and sooner, than I had ven¬ 
tured to hope for. The path through the wood had been 
made familiar to me, by many a solitary stroll, in my for¬ 
mer visit to Elveston; and how I could have so suddenly 
and so entirely lost it—even though I was so engrossed in 
thinking of Arthur and his lady-love that I heeded little 
else—was a mystery to me. “And this open place”, I said 
to myself, “seems to have some memory about it I cannot 
distinctly recall—surely it is the very spot where I saw 
those Fairy-Children! But I hope there are no snakes 
about!” I mused aloud, taking my seat on a fallen tree. “I 
certainly do not like snakes—and I don’t suppose Bruno 
likes them, either!” 

“No, he doesn’t like them!” said a demure little voice at 
my side. “He’s not afraid of them, you know. But he does¬ 
n’t like them. He says they’re too waggly!” 

Words fail me to describe the beauty of the little group 
—couched on a patch of moss, on the trunk of the fallen 
tree, that met my eager gaze: Sylvie reclining with her el¬ 
bow buried in the moss, and her rosy cheek resting in the 
palm of her hand, and Bruno stretched at her feet with his 
head in her lap. 

“Too waggly?” was all I could say in so sudden an 
emergency. 

“I'm not particular,” Bruno said carelessly: “but I do 
like straight animals best-” 

“But you like a dog when it wags its tail,” Sylvie inter¬ 
rupted. “You know you do, Bruno!” 

“But there’s more of a dog, isn’t there. Mister Sir?” 
Bruno appealed to me. “ You wouldn’t like to have a dog 
if it hadn’t got nuffin but a head and a tail?” 

I admitted that a dog of that kind would be uninterest¬ 
ing. 

“There isn’t such a dog as that,” Sylvie thoughtfully re¬ 
marked. 



A CHANGED CROCODILE 373 

“But there would be,” cried Bruno, “if the Professor 
shortened it up for us!” 

"Shortened it up?” I said. “That’s something new. 
How does he do it ? ” 

“He’s got a curious machine-” Sylvie was beginning 

to explain. 

“A welly curious machine,” Bruno broke in, not at all 
willing to have the story thus taken out of his mouth, 
“and if 00 puts in—somefinoruvver—at one end, 00 know 
—and he turns the handle—and it comes out at the uvver 
end, oh, ever so short!” 

"As short as short!” Sylvie echoed. 

“And one day—when we was in Outland, 00 know— 
before we came to Fairyland—me and Sylvie took him a 
big Crocodile. And he shortened it up for us. And it did 
look so funny! And it kept looking round, and saying 
‘wherever is the rest of me got to?’ And then its eyes 
looked unhappy-” 

“Not both its eyes,” Sylvie interrupted. 

“Course not!” said the little fellow. “Only the eye that 
couldn’t see wherever the rest of it had got to. But the eye 
that could see wherever-” 

“How short was the Crocodile?” I asked, as the story 
was getting a little complicated. 

“Half as short again as when we caught it —so long,” 
said Bruno, spreading out his arms to their full stretch. 

I tried to calculate what this would come to, but it was 
too hard for me. Please make it out for me, dear Child 
who reads this! 

“But you didn't leave the poor thing so short as that, 
did you?” 

"Well, no. Sylvie and me took it back again and we got 
it stretched to—to—how much was it, Sylvie?” 

“Two times and a half, and a little bit more,” said Syl¬ 
vie. 

“It wouldn’t like that better than the other way, I’m 
afraid?” 

"Oh, but it did though!” Bruno put in eagerly. “It were 



374 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

proud of its new tail! Oo never saw a Crocodile so proud! 
Why it could go round and walk on the top of its tail, 
and along its back, all the way to its head!” 

"Not quite all the way,” said Sylvie. "It couldn’t, you 
know.” 

"Ah, but it did, once!” Bruno cried triumphantly. “Oo 
weren’t looking—but I watched it. And it walked on 
tipplety-toe, so as it wouldn’t wake itself, ’cause it thought 
it were asleep. And it got both its paws on its tail. And it 
walked and it walked all the way along its back. And it 
walked and it walked on its forehead. And it walked a 
tiny little way down its nose! There now!” 

This was a good deal worse than the last puzzle. Please, 
dear Child, help again! 

“I don't believe no Crocodile never walked along its 
own forehead!” Sylvie cried, too much excited by the con¬ 
troversy to limit the number of her negatives. 

"Oo don’t know the reason why it did it!” Bruno scorn¬ 
fully retorted. “It had a welly good reason. I heard it say 
‘Why shouldn’t I walk on my own forehead?’ So a course 
it did, oo know!” 

"If that’s a good reason, Bruno,” I said, "why shouldn't 
you get up that tree?” 

"Shall, in a minute,” said Bruno: "soon as we’ve done 
talking. Only two peoples can’t talk comfably togewer, 
when one’s getting up a tree, and the other isn’t!” 

It appeared to me that a conversation would scarcely 
be "comfable” while trees were being climbed, even if 
both the "peoples” were doing it: but it was evidently 
dangerous to oppose any theory of Bruno’s; so I thought 
it best to let the question drop, and to ask for an account 
of the machine that made things longer. 

This time Bruno was at a loss, and left it to Sylvie. "It’s 
like a mangle,” she said: "if things are put in, they get 
squoze-” 

"Squeezeled!” Bruno interrupted. 

"Yes.” Sylvie accepted the correction, but did not at¬ 
tempt to pronounce the word, which was evidently new 



A CHANGED CROCODILE 375 

to her. “They get—like that—and they come out, oh, 
ever so long!” 

‘ ‘ Once,' ’ Bruno began again,'' Sylvie and me writed-’' 

“Wrote!” Sylvie whispered. 

“Well, we wroted a Nursery-Song, and the Professor 
mangled it longer for us. It were ‘ There was a little Man, 
And he had a little gun, And the bullets -’ ” 

“I know the rest,” I interrupted. “But would you say 
it long —I mean the way that it came out of the mangle?” 

“We’ll get the Professor to sing it for you,” said Sylvie. 
“It would spoil it to say it.” 

“I would like to meet the Professor,” I said. “And I 
would like to take you all with me, to see some friends of 
mine, that live near here. Would you like to come?” 

"I don't think the Professor would like to come,” said 
Sylvie. “He’s very shy. But wed like it very much. Only 
we’d better not come this size, you know.” 

The difficulty had occurred to me already: and I had 
felt that perhaps there would be a slight awkwardness in 
introducing two such tiny friends into Society. “What 
size will you be?” I enquired. 

“We’d better come as—common children,” Sylvie 
thoughtfully replied. “That's the easiest size to manage.” 

“Could you come to-day?” I said, thinking “then we 
could have you at the Picnic!” 

Sylvie considered a little. “Not to-day,” she replied. 
“We haven’t got the things ready. We’ll come on—Tues¬ 
day next, if you like. And now, really, Bruno, you must 
come and do your lessons.” 

“I wiss oo wouldn’t say ‘really Bruno!’ ” the little fel¬ 
low pleaded, with pouting lips that made him look pret¬ 
tier than ever. "It always shows there’s something horrid 
coming! And I wo’n’t kiss you, if you’re so unkind.” 

“Ah, but you have kissed me!” Sylvie exclaimed in 
merry triumph. 

“Well then, I’ll M«kiss you!” And he threw his arms 
round her neck for this novel, but apparently not very 
painful, operation. 



376 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

“It’s very like kissing'.” Sylvie remarked, as soon as her 
lips were again free for speech. 

“Oo don’t know nuffin about it! It were just the con- 
keryl” Bruno replied with much severity, as he marched 
away. 

Sylvie turned her laughing face to me. “Shall we come 
on Tuesday?" she said. 

“Very well,” I said: “let it be Tuesday next. But where 
is the Professor? Did he come with you to Fairyland?” 

“No,” said Sylvie. “But he promised he’d come and see 
us, some day. He’s getting his Lecture ready. So he has to 
stay at home.” 

"At home?” I said dreamily, not feeling quite sure what 
she had said. 

“Yes, Sir. His Lordship and Lady Muriel are at home. 
Please to walk this way.” 


Chapter XVII 
The Three Badgers 

Still more dreamily I found myself following this im¬ 
perious voice into a room where the Earl, his daughter, 
and Arthur, were seated. “So you re come at last!” said 
Lady Muriel, in a tone of playful reproach. 

“I was delayed,” I stammered. Though what it was that 
had delayed me I should have been puzzled to explain! 
Luckily no questions were asked. 

The carriage was ordered round, the hamper, contain¬ 
ing our contribution to the Picnic, was duly stowed away, 
and we set forth. 

There was no need for me to maintain the conversation. 
Lady Muriel and Arthur were evidently on those most de¬ 
lightful of terms, where one has no need to check thought 
after thought, as it rises to the lips, with the fear ‘‘this will 
not be appreciated —this will give offence —this will sound 



THE THREE BADGERS 377 

too serious—this will sound flippant”: like very old 
friends, in fullest sympathy, their talk rippled on. 

"Why shouldn’t we desert the Picnic and go in some 
other direction?” she suddenly suggested. “A party of 
four is surely self-sufficing? And as for food, our ham- 
per- 

"Why shouldn’t we? What a genuine lady’s argument!” 
laughed Arthur. "A lady never knows on which side the 
onus frobandi —the burden of proving—lies!” 

"Do men always know?” she asked with a pretty as¬ 
sumption of meek docility. 

"With one exception—the only one I can think of—Dr. 
Watts, who has asked the senseless question 

‘Why should I deprive my neighbour 
Of his goods against his will?’ 

Fancy that as an argument for Honesty! His position 
seems to be ‘I'm only honest because I see no reason to 
steal.’ And the thief’s answer is of course complete and 
crushing. ‘I deprive my neighbour of his goods because I 
want them myself. And I do it against his will because 
there's no chance of getting him to consent to it!’ ” 

"I can give you one other exception,” I said: "an argu¬ 
ment I heard only to-day—and not by a lady. ‘Why 
shouldn't I walk on my own forehead?’ ” 

"What a curious subject for speculation!” said Lady 
Muriel, turning to me, with eyes brimming over with 
laughter. "May we know who propounded the question? 
And did he walk on his own forehead?” 

"I ca’n’t remember who it was that said it!” I faltered. 
"Nor where I heard it!” 

"Whoever it was, I hope we shall meet him at the Pic¬ 
nic!” said Lady Muriel. "It's a far more interesting ques¬ 
tion than ‘Isn’t this a picturesque ruin?’ ‘Aren’t those 
autumn-tints lovely?’ I shall have to answer those two 
questions ten times, at least, this afternoon!” 

"That's one of the miseries of Society!” said Arthur. 
“Why ca’n’t people let one enjoy the beauties of Nature 



378 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

without having to say so every minute? Why should Life 
be one long Catechism?” 

“It’s just as bad at a picture-gallery,” the Earl re¬ 
marked. "I went to the R.A. last May, with a conceited 
young artist: and he did torment me! I wouldn’t have 
minded his criticizing the pictures himself: but I had to 
agree with him—or else to argue the point, which would 
have been worse!” 

“It was depreciatory criticism, of course?” said Arthur. 

“I don’t see the ‘of course’ at all.” 

"Why, did you ever know a conceited man dare to 
praise a picture? The one thing he dreads (next to not be¬ 
ing noticed) is to be proved fallible! If you once praise a 
picture, your character for infallibility hangs by a thread. 
Suppose it’s a figure-picture, and you venture to say 
‘draws well’. Somebody measures it, and finds one of the 
proportions an eighth of an inch wrong. You are disposed 
of as a critic! ‘Did you say he draws well}’ your friends 
enquire sarcastically, while you hang your head and 
blush. No. The only safe course, if any one says 'draws 
well’, is to shrug your shoulders. ‘Draws well?’ you repeat 
thoughtfully. ‘Draws well} Humph!’ That’s the way to 
become a great critic!” 

Thus airily chatting, after a pleasant drive through a 
few miles of beautiful scenery, we reached the rendezvous 
—a ruined castle—where the rest of the picnic-party were 
already assembled. We spent an hour or two in sauntering 
about the ruins: gathering at last, by common consent, 
into a few random groups, seated on the side of a mound, 
which commanded a good view of the old castle and its 
surroundings. 

The momentary silence, that ensued, was promptly 
taken possession of—or, more correctly, taken into cus- 
tod)'—by a Voice; a voice so smooth, so monotonous, so 
sonorous, that one felt, with a shudder, that any other 
conversation was precluded, and that, unless some des¬ 
perate remedy were adopted, we were fated to listen to a 
Lecture, of which no man could foresee the end! 



THE THREE BADGERS 


379 

The Speaker was a broadly-built man, whose large, flat, 
pale face was bounded on the North by a fringe of hair, 
on the East and West by a fringe of whisker, and on the 
South by a fringe of beard—the whole constituting a uni¬ 
form halo of stubbly whitey-brown bristles. His features 
were so entirely destitute of expression that I could not 
help saying to myself—helplessly, as if in the clutches of 
a night-mare—“they are only penciled in: no final touches 
as yet!” And he had a way of ending every sentence with 
a sudden smile, which spread like a ripple over that vast 
blank surface, and was gone in a moment, leaving behind 
it such absolute solemnity that I felt impelled to murmur 
"it was not he: it was somebody else that smiled!” 

“Do you observe?” (such was the phrase with which 
the wretch began each sentence) "Do you observe the way 
in which that broken arch, at the very top of the ruin, 
stands out against the clear sky? It is placed exactly right: 
and there is exactly enough of it. A little more, or a little 
less, and all would be utterly spoiled!” 

“Oh gifted architect!” murmured Arthur, inaudibly to 
all but Lady Muriel and myself. “Foreseeing the exact 
effect his work would have, when in ruins, centuries after 
his death!” 

“And do you observe, where those trees slope down the 
hill,” (indicating them with a sweep of the hand, and 
with all the patronising air of the man who has himself 
arranged the landscape), “how the mists rising from the 
river fill up exactly those intervals where we need indis¬ 
tinctness, for artistic effect? Here, in the foreground, a 
few clear touches are not amiss: but a £>ac&-ground with¬ 
out mist, you know! It is simply barbarous! Yes, we need 
indistinctness!” 

The orator looked so pointedly at me as he uttered these 
words, that I felt bound to reply, by murmuring some¬ 
thing to the effect that I hardly felt the need myself —and 
that I enjoyed looking at a thing, better, when I could 
see it. 

“Quite so!” the great man sharply took me up. "From 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


380 

your point of view, that is correctly put. But for any one 
who has a soul for Art, such a view is preposterous. Na¬ 
ture is one thing. Art is another. Nature shows us the 
world as it is. But Art —as a Latin author tells us— Art, 
you know—the words have escaped my memory-” 

"Ars est celare Naturam,” Arthur interposed with a de¬ 
lightful promptitude. 

"Quite so!” the orator replied with an air of relief. "I 
thank you! Ars est celare Naturam —but that isn’t it.” 
And, for a few peaceful moments, the orator brooded, 
frowningly, over the quotation. The welcome opportunity 
was seized, and another voice struck into the silence. 

"What a lovely old ruin it is!” cried a young lady in 
spectacles, the very embodiment of the March of Mind, 
looking at Lady Muriel, as the proper recipient of all 
really original remarks. “And don’t you admire those 
autumn-tints on the trees? I do, intensely !” 

Lady Muriel shot a meaning glance at me; but replied 
with admirable gravity. "Oh yes indeed, indeed! So true!” 

"And isn’t it strange”, said the young lady, passing 
with startling suddenness from Sentiment to Science, 
"that the mere impact of certain coloured rays upon the 
Retina should give us such exquisite pleasure?” 

"You have studied Physiology, then?” a certain young 
Doctor courteously enquired. 

"Oh, yes! Isn’t it a sweet Science?” 

Arthur slightly smiled. "It seems a paradox, does it 
not,” he went on, "that the image formed on the Retina 
should be inverted?” 

"It is puzzling,” she candidly admitted. "Why is it we 
do not see things upside-down?” 

"You have never heard the Theory, then, that the 
Brain also is inverted?” 

"No indeedl What a beautiful fact! But how is it 
proved?” 

“Thus,” replied Arthur, with all the gravity of ten 
Professors rolled into one. "What we call the vertex of 
the Brain is really its base: and what we call its base is 



THE THREE BADGERS 


381 

really its vertex : it is simply a question of nomenclature .” 

This last polysyllable settled the matter. “How truly 
delightful!" the fair Scientist exclaimed with enthusiasm. 
“I shall ask our Physiological Lecturer why he never gave 
us that exquisite Theory!” 

“I’d give something to be present when the question 
is asked!” Arthur whispered to me, as, at a signal from 
Lady Muriel, we moved on to where the hampers had 
been collected, and devoted ourselves to the more sub¬ 
stantial business of the day. 

We “waited” on ourselves, as the modern barbarism 
(combining two good things in such a way as to secure 
the discomforts of both and the advantages of neither) 
of having a picnic with servants to wait upon you, had 
not yet reached this out-of-the-way region—and of course 
the gentlemen did not even take their places until the 
ladies had been duly provided with all imaginable crea¬ 
ture-comforts. Then I supplied myself with a plate of 
something solid and a glass of something fluid, and found 
a place next to Lady Muriel. 

It had been left vacant—apparently, for Arthur, as a 
distinguished stranger: but he had turned shy, and had 
placed himself next to the young lady in spectacles, whose 
high rasping voice had already cast loose upon Society 
such ominous phrases as “Man is a bundle of Qualities!”, 
“the Objective is only attainable through the Subjec¬ 
tive!”. Arthur was bearing it bravely: but several faces 
wore a look of alarm, and I thought it high time to start 
some less metaphysical topic. 

“In my nursery days,” I began, “when the weather 
didn’t suit for an out-of-doors picnic, we were allowed 
to have a peculiar kind, that we enjoyed hugely. The 
table cloth was laid under the table, instead of upon it: 
we sat round it on the floor: and I believe we really en¬ 
joyed that extremely uncomfortable kind of dinner more 
than we ever did the orthodox arrangement!” 

“I’ve no doubt of it,” Lady Muriel replied. “There’s 
nothing a well-regulated child hates so much as regu- 



382 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

larity. I believe a really healthy boy would thoroughly 
enjoy Greek Grammar—if only he might stand on his 
head to learn it! And your carpet-dinner certainly spared 
you one feature of a picnic, which is to me its chief 
drawback." 

“The chance of a shower?” I suggested. 

“No, the chance—or rather the certainty—of live things 
occurring in combination with one’s food! Spiders are my 
bugbear. Now my father has no sympathy with that 
sentiment— have you, dear?" For the Earl had caught the 
word and turned to listen. 

“To each his sufferings, all are men,” he replied in the 
sweet sad tones that seemed natural to him: “each has his 
pet aversion.” 

“But you’ll never guess hisl” Lady Muriel said, with 
that delicate silvery laugh that was music to my ears. 

I declined to attempt the impossible. 

“He doesn’t like snakesl” she said, in a stage whisper. 
“Now, isn’t that an unreasonable aversion? Fancy not 
liking such a dear, coaxingly, clingingly affectionate crea¬ 
ture as a snake!” 

“Not like snakesl” I exclaimed. "Is such a thing pos¬ 
sible?" 

“No, he doesn’t like them,” she repeated with a pretty 
mock-gravity. “He’s not afraid of them, you know. But 
he doesn’t like them. He says they’re too waggly!” 

I was more startled than I liked to show. There was 
something so uncanny in this echo of the very words I 
had so lately heard from that little forest-sprite, that it 
was only by a great effort I succeeded in saying, carelessly, 
“Let us banish so unpleasant a topic. Wo’n’t you sing us 
something, Lady Muriel? I know you do sing without 
music.” 

“The only songs I know—without music—are desper¬ 
ately sentimental, I’m afraid! Are your tears all ready?” 

“Quite ready! Quite ready!” came from all sides, and 
Lady Muriel—not being one of those lady-singers who 
think it de rigueur to decline to sing till they have been 



THE THREE BADGERS 


383 

petitioned three or four times, and have pleaded failure 
of memory, loss of voice, and other conclusive reasons 
for silence—began at once: 

“There be three Badgers on a mossy stone, 

Beside a dark and covered way: 

Each dreams himself a monarch on his throne, 

A nd so they stay and stay — 

Though their old Father languishes alone. 

They stay, and stay, and stay. 

“ There be three Herrings loitering around, 

Longing to share that mossy seat: 

Each Herring tries to sing what she has found 
That makes Life seem so sweet. 

Thus, with a grating and uncertain sound, 

They bleat, and bleat, and bleat. 

“The Mother-Herring, on the salt sea-wave, 

Sought vainly for her absent ones: 

The Father-Badger, writhing in a cave, 

Shrieked out ‘Return, my sons! 

You shall have buns', he shrieked, ‘if you’ll behave! 

Yea, buns, and buns, and buns!’ 

“ ‘I fear’, said she, ‘your sons have gone astray? 

My daughters left me while I slept.’ 

' Yes’m,’ the Badger said: ‘it’s as you say.’ 

‘ They should be better kept. ‘ ^ 

Thus the poor parents talked the time away, 

And wept, and wept, and wept.’’ 

Here Bruno broke off suddenly. “The Herrings’ Song 
wants anuvver tune, Sylvie,’’ he said. “And I ca’n’t sing it 
—not wizout 00 plays it for me!’’ 

Instantly Sylvie seated herself upon a tiny mushroom, 
that happened to grow in front of a daisy, as if it were 
the most ordinary musical instrument in the world, and 
played on the petals as if they were the notes of an organ. 
And such delicious tiny music it was! Such teeny-tiny 
music! 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


384 

Bruno held his head on one side, and listened very 
gravely for a few moments until he had caught the mel¬ 
ody. Then the sweet childish voice rang out once more: 

"Oh, dear beyond our dearest dreams. 

Fairer than all that fairest seems! 

To feast the rosy hours away. 

To revel in a roundelay! 

How blest would be 
A life so free — 

Ipwergis-Pudding to consume. 

And drink the subtle Azzigoom! 

”And if, in other days and hours. 

Mid other fluffs and other flowers, 

The choice were given me how to dine — 

‘Name what thou wilt: it shall be thine!’ 

Oh, then I see 
The life for me — 

Ipwergis-Pudding to consume. 

And drink the subtle Azzigoom!” 

"Oo may leave off playing now, Sylvie. I can do the 
uvver tune much better wizout a compliment.” 

“He means ‘without accompaniment,’ ” Sylvie whis¬ 
pered, smiling at my puzzled look: and she pretended 
to shut up the stops of the organ. 

"The Badgers did not care to talk to Fish: 

They did not dote on Herrings’ songs: 

They never had experienced the dish 
To which that name belongs: 

*And oh, to pinch their tails’, (this was their wish), 

‘With tongs, yea, tongs, and tongs!’ ” 

I ought to mention that he marked the parenthesis, 
in the air, with his finger. It seemed to me a very good 
plan. You know there’s no sound to represent it—any 
more than there is for a question. 

Suppose you have said to your friend “You are better 
to-day,” and that you want him to understand that you 



THE THREE BADGERS 


385 

are asking him a question, what can be simpler than just 
to make a “?” in the air with your finger? He would 
understand you in a moment! 

" ‘And are not these the Fish,' the Eldest sighed . 

‘Whose Mother dwells beneath the foam?’ 

‘They are the Fish!’ the Second one replied. 

‘A nd they have left their home !’ 

‘Oh wicked Fish,' the Youngest Badger cried, 

‘To roam, yea, roam, and roam!' 

“Gently the Badgers trotted to the shore — 

The sandy shore that fringed the bay: 

Each in his mouth a living Herring bore — 

Those aged ones waxed gay: 

Clear rang their voices through the ocean’s roar, 

‘Hooray, hooray, hooray!" ” 

“So they all got safe home again,” Bruno said, after 
waiting a minute to see if I had anything to say: he evi¬ 
dently felt that some remark ought to be made. And I 
couldn’t help wishing there were some such rule in So¬ 
ciety, at the conclusion of a song—that the singer herself 
should say the right thing, and not leave it to the audi¬ 
ence. Suppose a young lady has just been warbling (“with 
a grating and uncertain sound”) Shelley’s exquisite lyric 
“I arise from dreams of thee”: how much nicer it would 
be, instead of your having to say “Oh, thank you, Thank 
you!” for the young lady herself to remark, as she draws 
on her gloves, while the impassioned words “Oh, press 
it to thine own, or it will break at last!” are still ringing 
in your ears,'“—but she wouldn’t do it, you know. So it 
did break at last.” 

“And I knew it would!” she added quietly, as I started 
at the sudden crash of broken glass. “You’ve been holding 
it sideways for the last minute, and letting all the cham¬ 
pagne run out! Were you asleep, I wonder? I’m so sorry 
my singing has such a narcotic effect!” 



Chapter XVIII 


Queer Street, Number Forty 

Lady Muriel was the speaker. And, for the moment, 
that was the only fact I could clearly realize. But how 
she came to be there—and how I came to be there—and 
how the glass of champagne came to be there—all these 
were questions which I felt it better to think out in 
silence, and not commit myself to any statement till I 
understood things a little more clearly. 

“First accumulate a mass of Facts: and then construct 
a Theory.” That, I believe, is the true Scientic Method. I 
sat up, rubbed my eyes, and began to accumulate Facts. 

A smooth grassy slope, bounded, at the upper end, by 
venerable ruins half buried in ivy, at the lower, by a 
stream seen through arching trees—a dozen gaily-dressed 
people, seated in little groups here and there—some open 
hampers—the debris of a picnic—such were the Facts 
accumulated by the Scientific Researcher. And now, what 
deep, far-reaching Theory was he to construct from them? 
The Researcher found himself at fault. Yet stay! One 
Fact had escaped his notice. While all the rest were 
grouped in twos and in threes, Arthur was alone: while 
all tongues were talking, his was silent: while all faces 
were gay, his was gloomy and despondent. Here was a 
Fact indeed! The Researcher felt that a Theory must be 
constructed without delay. 

Lady Muriel had just risen and left the party. Could 
that be the cause of his despondency? The Theory hardly 
rose to the dignity of a Working Hypothesis. Clearly 
more Facts were needed. 

The Researcher looked round him once more: and now 
the Facts accumulated in such bewildering profusion, that 
the Theory was lost among them. For Lady Muriel had 
gone to meet a strange gentleman, just visible in the dis¬ 
tance: and now she was returning with him, both of 
them talking eagerly and joyfully, like old friends who 

386 



QUEER STREET, NUMBER FORTY 387 

have been long parted: and now she was moving from 
group to group, introducing the new hero of the hour: 
and he, young, tall, and handsome, moved gracefully at 
her side, with the erect bearing and firm tread of a 
soldier. Verily, the Theory looked gloomy for Arthur! 
His eye caught mine, and he crossed to me. 

“He is very handsome,” I said. 

“Abominably handsome!” muttered Arthur: then 
smiled at his own bitter words. “Lucky no one heard me 
but you!” 

“Doctor Forester,” said Lady Muriel, who had just 
joined us, “let me introduce to you my cousin Eric Lin- 
don —Captain Lindon, I should say.” 

Arthur shook off his ill-temper instantly and com¬ 
pletely, as he rose and gave the young soldier his hand. 
“I have heard of you,” he said. “I’m very glad to make 
the acquaintance of Lady Muriel’s cousin.” 

“Yes, that’s all I’m distinguished for, asyetl” said Eric 
(so we soon got to call him) with a winning smile. “And 
I doubt”, glancing at Lady Muriel, “if it even amounts to 
a good-conduct-badge! But it’s something to begin with.” 

“You must come to my father, Eric,” said Lady Muriel. 
“I think he’s wandering among the ruins.” And the pair 
moved on. 

The gloomy look returned to Arthur's face: and I 
could see it was only to distract his thoughts that he took 
his place at the side of the metaphysical young lady, and 
resumed their interrupted discussion. 

“Talking of Herbert Spenser,” he began, “do you really 
find no logical difficulty in regarding Nature as a process 
of involution, passing from definite coherent homo¬ 
geneity to indefinite incoherent heterogeneity?” 

Amused as I was at the ingenious jumble he had made 
of Spencer’s words, I kept as grave a face as I could. 

“No physical difficulty,” she confidently replied: “but 
I haven’t studied Logic much. Would you state the diffi¬ 
culty?” 

“Well,” said Arthur, “do you accept it as self-evident? 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


388 

Is it as obvious, for instance, as that ‘things that are 
greater than the same are greater than one another’ ? ” 

“To my mind,” she modestly replied, “it seems quite as 
obvious. I grasp both truths by intuition. But other minds 
may need some logical—I forget the technical terms.” 

“For a complete logical argument”, Arthur began with 
admirable solemnity, “we need two prim Misses-” 

“Of course!” she interrupted. “I remember that word 
now. And they produce-?” 

“A Delusion,” said Arthur. 

“Ye—es?” she said dubiously. “I don’t seem to remem¬ 
ber that so well. But what is the whole argument called?” 

“A Sillygism.” 

“Ah, yes! I remember now. But I don’t need a Silly¬ 
gism, you know, to prove that mathematical axiom you 
mentioned.” 

“Nor to prove that ‘all angles are equal’, I suppose?” 

“Why, of course not! One takes such a simple truth as 
that for granted!” 

Here I ventured to interpose, and to offer her a plate 
of strawberries and cream. I felt really uneasy at the 
thought that she might detect the trick: and I contrived, 
unperceived by her, to shake my head reprovingly at the 
pseudo-philosopher. Equally unperceived by her, Arthur 
slightly raised his shoulders, and spread his hands abroad, 
as who should say “What else can I say to her?” and 
moved away leaving her to discuss her strawberries by 
“involution”, or any other way she preferred. 

By this time the carriages, that were to convey the 
revelers to their respective homes, had begun to assemble 
outside the Castle-grounds: and it became evident—now 
that Lady Muriel’s cousin had joined our party—that the 
problem, how to convey five people to Elveston, with a 
carriage that would only hold four, must somehow be 
solved. 

The Honourable Eric Lin don, who was at this moment 
walking up and down with Lady Muriel, might have 
solved it at once, no doubt, by announcing his intention of 



QUEER STREET, NUMBER FORTY 389 

returning on foot. Of this solution there did not seem to 
be the very smallest probability. 

The next best solution, it seemed to me, was that I 
should walk home: and this I at once proposed. 

“You’re sure you don't mind?” said the Earl. “I'm 
afraid the carriage wo'n’t take us all, and I don’t like 
to suggest to Eric to desert his cousin so soon.” 

“So far from minding it,” I said, “I should prefer it. 
It will give me time to sketch this beautiful old ruin.” 

“I’ll keep you company,” Arthur suddenly said. And, 
in answer to what I suppose was a look of surprise on my 
face, he said in a low voice, “I really would rather. I shall 
be quite de trop in the carriage!” 

“I think I’ll walk too,” said the Earl. “You’ll have to 
be content with Eric as your escort,” he added, to Lady 
Muriel, who had joined us while he was speaking. 

“You must be as entertaining as Cerberus—‘three gen¬ 
tlemen rolled into one’—” Lady Muriel said to her com¬ 
panion. “It will be a grand military exploit!” 

“A sort of Forlorn Hope?” the Captain modestly sug¬ 
gested. 

"You do pay pretty compliments!” laughed his fair 
cousin. “Good day to you, gentlemen three—or rather 
deserters three!” And the two young folk entered the car¬ 
riage and were driven away. 

“How long will your sketch take?” said Arthur. 

“Well,” I said, “I should like an hour for it. Don’t you 
think you had better go without me? I’ll return by train. 
I know there’s one in about an hour’s time.” 

“Perhaps that would be best,” said the Earl. “The Sta¬ 
tion is quite close.” 

So I was left to my own devices, and soon found a 
comfortable seat, at the foot of a tree, from which I had 
a good view of the ruins. 

“It is a very drowsy day,” I said to myself, idly turning 
over the leaves of the sketch-book to find a blank page. 
"Why, I thought you were a mile off by this time!” For, 
to my surprise, the two walkers were back again. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


390 

“I came back to remind you”, Arthur said, “that the 
trains go every ten minutes-” 

“Nonsense!” I said. “It isn’t the Metropolitan Rail¬ 
way!” 

“It is the Metropolitan Railway,” the Earl insisted. 
“This is a part of Kensington.” 

“Why do you talk with your eyes shut?” said Arthur. 
“Wake up!” 

“I think it’s the heat that makes me so drowsy,” I said, 
hoping, but not feeling quite sure, that I was talking 
sense. "Am I awake now?” 

“I think not,” the Earl judicially pronounced. “What 
do you think. Doctor? He’s only got one eye open!” 

"And he’s snoring like anything!” cried Bruno. “Do 
wake up, you dear old thing!” And he and Sylvie set to 
work, rolling the heavy head from side to side, as if its 
connection with the shoulders was a matter of no sort of 
importance. 

And at last the Professor opened his eyes, and sat up, 
blinking at us with eyes of utter bewilderment. “Would 
you have the kindness to mention”, he said, addressing 
me with his usual old-fashioned courtesy, “whereabouts 
we are just now—and who we are, beginning with me?” 

I thought it best to begin with the children. “This is 
Sylvie, Sir; and this is Bruno.” 

“Ah, yes! I know them well enough!” the old man mur¬ 
mured. “It’s myself I’m most anxious about. And perhaps 
you'll be good enough to mention, at the same time, how 
I got here?” 

“A harder problem occurs to me,” I ventured to say: 
“and that is, how you’re to get back again.” 

“True, true!” the Professor replied. “That’s the Prob¬ 
lem, no doubt. Viewed as a Problem, outside of oneself, 
it is a most interesting one. Viewed as a portion of one’s 
own biography, it is, I must admit, very distressing!” He 
groaned, but instantly added, with a chuckle, “As to 
myself, I think you mentioned that I am-” 

“Oo’re the ProfessorV’ Bruno shouted in his ear. "Didn’t 



QUEER STREET, NUMBER FORTY 3 QI 

00 know that ? Oo’ve come from Outlandl And it’s ever 
so far away from here!” 

The Professor leapt to his feet with the agility of a 
boy. ‘‘Then there’s no time to lose!” he exclaimed anx¬ 
iously. ‘‘I’ll just ask this guileless peasant, with his brace 
of buckets that contain (apparently) water, if he’ll be so 
kind as to direct us. Guileless peasant!” he proceeded in 
a louder voice. ‘‘Would you tell us the way to Outland?” 

The guileless peasant turned with a sheepish grin. 
“Hey?” was all he said. 

‘‘The—way—to—Outland!” the Professor repeated. 

The guileless peasant set down his buckets and con¬ 
sidered. “Ah, dunnot-” 

"I ought to mention,” the Professor hastily put in, “that 
whatever you say will be used in evidence against you.” 

The guileless peasant instantly resumed his buckets. 
“Then ah says nowt!” he answered briskly, and walked 
away at a great pace. 

The children gazed sadly at the rapidly vanishing fig¬ 
ure. “He goes very quick!” the Professor said with a sigh. 
“But I know that was the right thing to say. I've studied 
your English Laws. However, let’s ask this next man 
that’s coming. He is not guileless, and he is not a peasant 
—but I don’tknowthateitherpointisofvitalimportance.” 

It was, in fact, the Honourable Eric Lindon, who had 
apparently fulfilled his task of escorting Lady Muriel 
home, and was now strolling leisurely up and down the 
road outside the house, enjoying a solitary cigar. 

“Might I trouble you, Sir, to tell us the nearest way to 
Outland!” Oddity as he was, in outward appearance, the 
Professor was, in that essential nature which no outward 
disguise could conceal, a thorough gentleman. 

And, as such, Eric Lindon accepted him instantly. He 
took the cigar from his mouth, and delicately shook off 
the ash, while he considered. “The name sounds strange 
to me,” he said. “I doubt if I can help you.” 

"It is not very far from Fairyland,” the Professor sug¬ 
gested. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


392 

Eric Lindon’s eye-brows were slightly raised at these 
words, and an amused smile, which he courteously tried 
to repress, flitted across his handsome face. “A trifle 
crackedl” he muttered to himself. “But what a jolly old 
patriarch it is!” Then he turned to the children. “And 
ca’n’t you help him, little folk?” he said, with a gentle¬ 
ness of tone that seemed to win their hearts at once. 
“Surely you know all about it? 

‘How many miles to Babylon? 

Threescore miles and ten. 

Can I get there by candlelight? 

Yes, and back again!’ ” 

To my surprise, Bruno ran forwards to him, as if he 
were some old friend of theirs, seized the disengaged 
hand and hung on to it with both of his own: and there 
stood this tall dignified officer in the middle of the road, 
gravely swinging a little boy to and fro, while Sylvie stood 
ready to push him, exactly as if a real swing had suddenly 
been provided for their pastime. 

“We don’t want to get to Babylon, 00 know!” Bruno 
explained as he swung. 

“And it isn’t candlelight: it’s daylightV ’ Sylvie added, 
giving the swing a push of extra vigour, which nearly 
took the whole machine off its balance. 

By this time it was clear to me that Eric Lindon was 
quite unconscious of my presence. Even the Professor and 
the children seemed to have lost sight of me: and I stood 
in the midst of the group, as unconcernedly as a ghost, 
seeing but unseen. 

“How perfectly isochronous!” the Professor exclaimed 
with enthusiasm. He had his watch in his hand, and was 
carefully counting Bruno’s oscillations. “He measures 
time quite as accurately as a pendulum!” 

“Yet even pendulums,” the good-natured young sol¬ 
dier observed, as he carefully released his hand from 
Bruno’s grasp, “are not a joy for ever! Come, that’s 
enough for one bout, little man! Next time we meet, you 



QUEER STREET, NUMBER FORTY 393 

shall have another. Meanwhile you’d better take this old 
gentleman to Queer Street, Number-” 

“Well find it!” cried Bruno eagerly, as they dragged 
the Professor away. 

"We are much indebted to you!” the Professor said, 
looking over his shoulder. 

"Don’t mention it!” replied the officer, raising his hat 
as a parting salute. 

“What number did you say!” the Professor called from 
the distance. 

The officer made a trumpet of his two hands. "Forty!” 
he shouted in stentorian tones. "And not piano, by any 
means!” he added to himself. "It’s a mad world, my 
masters, a mad world!” He lit another cigar, and strolled 
on towards his hotel. 

"What a lovely evening!” I said, joining him as he 
passed me. 

“Lovely indeed,” he said. "Where did you come from? 
Dropped from the clouds?” 

“I’m strolling your way,” I said: and no further ex¬ 
planation seemed necessary. 

“Have a cigar?” 

“Thanks: I'm not a smoker.” 

"Is there a Lunatic Asylum near here?” 

"Not that I know of.” 

"Thought there might be. Met a lunatic just now. 
Queer old fish as ever I saw!” 

And so, in friendly chat, we took our homeward ways, 
and wished each other "good-night” at the door of his hot el. 

Left to myself, I felt the "eerie” feeling rush over me 
again, and saw, standing at the door of Number Forty, 
the three figures I knew so well. 

"Then it’s the wrong house?” Bruno was saying. 

“No, no! It’s the right house,” the Professor cheerfully 
replied: "but it’s the wrong street. That’s where we’ve 
made our mistake! Our best plan, now will be to-” 

It was over. The street was empty. Commonplace life 
was around me, and the "eerie” feeling had fled. 



Chapter XIX 
How to Make a Phlizz 

The week passed without any further communication 
with the "Hall”, as Arthur was evidently fearful that we 
might “wear out our welcome”; but when, on Sunday 
morning, we were setting out for church, I gladly agreed 
to his proposal to go round and enquire after the Earl, 
who was said to be unwell. 

Eric, who was strolling in the garden, gave us a good 
report of the invalid, who was still in bed, with Lady 
Muriel in attendance. 

“Are you coming with us to church?” I enquired. 

“Thanks, no,” he courteously replied. “It’s not— 
exactly—in my line, you know. It’s an excellent institu¬ 
tion—for the poor. When I’m with my own folk, I go, just 
to set them an example. But I’m not known here: so I 
think I'll excuse myself sitting out a sermon. Country- 
preachers are always so dull!” 

Arthur was silent till we were out of hearing. Then he 
said to himself, almost inaudibly, "Where two or three are 
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of 
them” 

“Yes,” I assented: “no doubt that is the principle on 
which church-going rests.” 

“And when he does go,” he continued (our thoughts 
ran so much together, that our conversation was often 
slightly elliptical), “I suppose he repeats the words '/ 
believe in the Communion of Saints’ ? ” 

But by this time we had reached the little church, into 
which a goodly stream of worshippers, consisting mainly 
of fishermen and their families, was flowing. 

The service would have been pronounced by any mod¬ 
em aesthetic religionist—or religious aesthete, which is it? 
—to be crude and cold: to me, coming fresh from the 
ever-advancing developments of a London church under 

394 



HOW TO MAKE A PHLIZZ 395 

a soi-disant "Catholic” Rector, it was unspeakably re¬ 
freshing. 

There was no theatrical procession of demure little 
choristers, trying their best not to simper under the ad¬ 
miring gaze of the congregation: the people’s share in the 
service was taken by the people themselves, unaided, ex¬ 
cept that a few good voices, judiciously posted here and 
there among them, kept the singing from going too far 
astray. 

There was no murdering of the noble music, contained 
in the Bible and the Liturgy, by its recital in a dead 
monotone, with no more expression than a mechanical 
talking-doll. 

No, the prayers were prayed, the lessons were read, 
and—best of all—the sermon was talked; and I found 
myself repeating, as we left the church, the words of 
Jacob, when he " awaked out of his sleep”. “ ‘Surely the 
Lord is in this place! This is none other but the house of 
God, and this is the gate of heaven.’ ” 

"Yes,” said Arthur, apparently in answer to my 
thoughts, "those ‘high’ services are fast becoming pure 
Formalism. More and more the people are beginning to 
regard them as ‘performances’, in which they only ‘as¬ 
sist’ in the French sense. And it is specially bad for the 
little boys. They’d be much less self-conscious as panto¬ 
mime-fairies. With all that dressing-up, and stagy- 
entrances and exits, and being always en evidence, no 
wonder if they're eaten up with vanity, the blatant little 
coxcombs!” 

When we passed the Hall on our return, we found the 
Earl and Lady Muriel sitting out ip the garden. Eric 
had gone for a stroll. 

We joined them, and the conversation soon turned on 
the sermon we had just heard, the subject of which was 
"selfishness”. 

“What a change has come over our pulpits”, Arthur 
remarked, "since the time when Paley gave that utterly 
selfish definition of virtue, ‘the doing good to mankind, 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


396 

in obedience to the will of God, and for the sake of ever¬ 
lasting happiness ’! ’ ’ 

Lady Muriel looked at him enquiringly, but she seemed 
to have learned by intuition, what years of experience 
had taught me, that the way to elicit Arthur’s deepest 
thoughts was neither to assent nor dissent, but simply to 
listen. 

“At that time,” he went on, “a great tidal wave of 
selfishness was sweeping over human thought. Right and 
Wrong had somehow been transformed into Gain and 
Loss, and Religion had become a sort of commercial 
transaction. We may be thankful that our preachers are 
beginning to take a nobler view of life.” 

“But is it not taught again and again in the Bible?” I 
ventured to ask. 

“Not in the Bible, as a whole,” said Arthur. “In the 
Old Testament, no doubt, rewards and punishments are 
constantly appealed to as motives for action. That teach¬ 
ing is best for children, and the Israelites seem to have 
been, mentally, utter children. We guide our children 
thus, at first: but we appeal, as soon as possible, to their 
innate sense of Right and Wrong: and, when that stage 
is safely past, we appeal to the highest motive of all, the 
desire for likeness to, and union with, the Supreme Good. 
I think you will find that to be the teaching of the Bible, 
as a whole, beginning with ‘that thy days may be long in 
the land’, and ending with ‘be ye perfect, even as your 
Father which is in heaven is perfect ’.” 

We were silent for awhile, and then Arthur went off 
on another tack. “Look at the literature of Hymns, now. 
How cankered it is, through and through, with selfish¬ 
ness! There are few human compositions more utterly 
degraded than some modern Hymns!” 

I quoted the stanza. 

" Whatever, Lord, we lend to Thee, 

Repaid a thousandfold shall be. 

Then gladly will we give to Thee, 

Giver of all!” 



HOW TO MAKE A PHLIZZ 397 

“Yes," he said grimly: “that is the typical stanza. And 
the very last charity-sermon I heard was infected with it. 
After giving many good reasons for charity, the preacher 
wound up with ‘and, for all you give, you will be repaid 
a thousandfold!’ Oh, the utter meanness of such a motive, 
to be put before men who do know what self-sacrifice is, 
who can appreciate generosity and heroism! Talk of 
Original Sin!” he went on with increasing bitterness. 
“Can you have a stronger proof of the Original Goodness 
there must be in this nation, than the fact that Religion 
has been preached to us, as a commercial speculation, for 
a century, and that we still believe in a God?” 

“It couldn’t have gone on so long", Lady Muriel mus¬ 
ingly remarked, “if the Opposition hadn’t been practi¬ 
cally silenced—put under what the French call la clSture. 
Surely in any lecture-hall, or in private society, such 
teaching would soon have been hooted down?” 

“I trust so," said Arthur: “and, though I don’t want 
to see ‘brawling in church’ legalized, I must say that our 
preachers enjoy an enormous privilege—which they ill 
deserve, and which they misuse terribly. We put our man 
into a pulpit, and we virtually tell him ‘Now, you may 
stand there and talk to us for half-an-hour. We wo’n’t 
interrupt you by so much as a word! You shall have it 
all your own way!’ And what does he give us in return? 
Shallow twaddle, that, if it were addressed to you over a 
dinner-table, you would think ‘Does the man take me for 
a fool?’ ” 

The return of Eric from his walk checked the tide of 
Arthur’s eloquence, and, after a few minutes’ talk on 
more conventional topics, we took our leave. Lady Muriel 
walked with us to the gate. “You have given me much to 
think about,” she said earnestly, as she gave Arthur her 
hand. “I’m so glad you came in!” And her words brought 
a real glow of pleasure into that pale worn face of his. 

On the Tuesday, as Arthur did not seem equal to more 
walking, I took a long stroll by myself, having stipulated 
that he was not to give the whole day to his books, but 



398 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

was to meet me at the Hall at about tea-time. On my way 
back, I passed the Station just as the afternoon-train 
came in sight, and sauntered down the stairs to see it 
come in. But there was little to gratify my idle curiosity: 
and, when the train was empty, and the platform clear, I 
found it was about time to be moving on, if I meant to 
reach the Hall by five. 

As I approached the end of the platform, from which 
a steep irregular wooden staircase conducted to the upper 
world, I noticed two passengers, who had evidently 
arrived by the train, but who, oddly enough, had entirely 
escaped my notice, though the arrivals had been so few. 
They were a young woman and a little girl: the former, 
so far as one could judge by appearances, was a nurse¬ 
maid, or possibly a nursery-governess, in attendance on 
the child, whose refined face, even more than her dress, 
distinguished her as of a higher class than her companion. 

The child’s face was refined, but it was also a worn 
and sad one, and told a tale (or so I seemed to read it) 
of much illness and suffering, sweetly and patiently borne. 
She had a little crutch to help herself along with: and 
she was now standing, looking wistfully up the long 
staircase, and apparently waiting till she could muster 
courage to begin the toilsome ascent. 

There are some things one says in life—as well as things 
one does —which come automatically, by reflex action, as 
the physiologists say (meaning, no doubt, action without 
reflection, just as lucus is said to be derived “a non lu- 
cendo”). Closing one’s eyelids, when something seems 
to be flying into the eye, is one of those actions, and say¬ 
ing “May I carry the little girl up the stairs?’’ was an¬ 
other. It wasn’t that any thought of offering help 
occurred to me, and that then I spoke: the first intimation 
I had, of being likely to make that offer, was the sound 
of my own voice, and the discovery that the offer had 
been made. The servant paused, doubtfully glancing 
from her charge to me, and then back again to the child. 
“Would you like it, dear?’’ she asked her. But no such 



HOW TO MAKE A PHLIZZ 399 

doubt appeared to cross the child’s mind: she lifted her 
arms eagerly to be taken up. "Please!” was all she said, 
while a faint smile flickered on the weary little face. I 
took her up with scrupulous care, and her little arm was 
at once clasped trustfully round my neck. 

She was a very light weight—so light, in fact, that the 
ridiculous idea crossed my mind that it was rather easier 
going up, with her in my arms, than it would have been 
without her: and, when we reached the road above, with 
its cart-ruts and loose stones—all formidable obstacles for 
a lame child—I found that I had said "I’d better carry 
her over this rough place”, before I had formed any men¬ 
tal connection between its roughness and my gentle little 
burden. "Indeed it’s troubling you too much, Sir!” the 
maid exclaimed. "She can walk very well on the flat.” 
But the arm, that was twined about my neck, clung just 
an atom more closely at the suggestion, and decided me 
to say "She’s no weight, really. I’ll carry her a little fur¬ 
ther. I’m going your way.” 

The nurse raised no further objection: and the next 
speaker was a ragged little boy, with bare feet, and a 
broom over his shoulder, who ran across the road, and 
pretended to sweep the perfectly dry road in front of us. 
"Give us a ’ap’ny!” the little urchin pleaded, with a broad 
grin on his dirty face. 

“Don’t give him a 'ap’ny!” said the little lady in my 
arms. The words sounded harsh: but the tone was gentle¬ 
ness itself. "He's an idle little boy!” And she laughed a 
laugh of such silvery sweetness as I had never yet heard 
from any lips but Sylvie’s. To my astonishment, the boy 
actually joined in the laugh, as if there were some subtle 
sympathy between them, as he ran away down the road 
and vanished through a gap in the hedge. 

But he was back in a few moments, having discarded 
his broom and provided himself, from some mysterious 
source, with an exquisite bouquet of flowers. "Buy a posy, 
buy a posy! Only a 'ap’ny!” he chanted, with the melan¬ 
choly drawl of a professional beggar. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


400 

“ Don’t buy it!" was Her Majesty’s edict as she looked 
down, with a lofty scorn that seemed curiously mixed 
with tender interest, on the ragged creature at her feet. 

But this time I turned rebel, and ignored the royal 
commands. Such lovely flowers, and of forms so entirely 
new to me, were not to be abandoned at the bidding of 
any little maid, however imperious. I bought the bou¬ 
quet: and the little boy, after popping the halfpenny into 
his mouth, turned head-over-heels, as if to ascertain 
whether the human mouth is really adapted to serve as a 
money-box. 

With wonder, that increased every moment, I turned 
over the flowers, and examined them one by one: there 
was not a single one among them that I could remember 
having ever seen before. At last I turned to the nurse¬ 
maid. "Do these flowers grow wild about here? I never 

saw-" but the speech died away on my lips. The 

nursemaid had vanished! 

"You can put me down, now, if you like," Sylvie 
quietly remarked. 

I obeyed in silence, and could only ask myself "Is this 
a dream ?”, on finding Sylvie and Bruno walking one on 
either side of me, and clinging to my hands with the 
ready confidence of childhood. 

"You’re larger than when I saw you last!" I began. 
"Really I think we ought to be introduced again! There’s 
so much of you that I never met before, you know." 

"Very well!” Sylvie merrily replied. "This is Bruno. 
It doesn’t take long. He’s only got one name!” 

"There’s another name to me!” Bruno protested, with 
a reproachful look at the Mistress of the Ceremonies. 
"And it’s— ‘Esquire ’!’’ 

"Oh, of course. I forgot," said Sylvie. "Bruno— 
EsquireV’ 

"And did you come here to meet me, my children?" I 
enquired. 

"You know I said we’d come on Tuesday,” Sylvie ex¬ 
plained. “Are we the proper size for common children?" 



HOW TO MAKE A PHLIZZ 401 

“Quite the right size for children ,” I replied, (adding 
mentally “though not common children, by any means!’’) 
“But what became of the nursemaid?” 

“It are gonel” Bruno solemnly replied. 

“Then it wasn’t solid, like Sylvie and you?” 

“No. Oo couldn’t touch it, oo know. If oo walked at 
it, oo’d go right froo!” 

“I quite expected you’d find it out, once,” said Sylvie. 
“Bruno ran it against a telegraph post, by accident. And 
it went in two halves. But you were looking the other 
way.” 

I felt that I had indeed missed an opportunity: to wit¬ 
ness such an event as a nursemaid going “in two halves” 
does not occur twice in a life-time! 

“When did oo guess it were Sylvie?” Bruno enquired. 

“I didn’t guess it, till it was Sylvie,” I said. “But how 
did you manage the nursemaid?” 

“Bruno managed it,” said Sylvie. “It’s called a Phlizz.” 

“And how do you make a Phlizz, Bruno?” 

“The Professor teached me how,” said Bruno. “First 
00 takes a lot of air-’ ’ 

“Oh, BrunoV’ Sylvie interposed. “The Professor said 
you weren’t to tell!” 

“But who did her voice! ” I asked. 

“Indeed it’s troubling you too much, Sir! She can walk 
very well on the flat.” 

Bruno laughed merrily as I turned hastily from side 
to side, looking in all directions for the speaker. “That 
were we!” he gleefully proclaimed, in his own voice. 

“She can indeed walk very well on the flat,” I said. 
“And I think I was the Flat.” 

By this time we were near the Hall. “This is where my 
friends live,” I said. “Will you come in and have some 
tea with them? ” 

Bruno gave a little jump of joy: and Sylvie said “Yes, 
please. You’d like some tea, Bruno, wouldn’t you? He 
hasn’t tasted tea”, she explained to me, “since we left 
Outland.” 


o 


L.C. 



402 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

“And that weren’t good tea!” said Bruno. “It were so 
welly weak!” 


Chapter XX 
Light Come, Light Go 

Lady Muriel’s smile of welcome could not quite con¬ 
ceal the look of surprise with which she regarded my 
new companions. 

I presented them in due form. “This is Sylvie, Lady 
Muriel. And this is Bruno.” 

“Any surname?” she enquired, her eyes twinkling 
with fun. 

“No,” I said gravely. “No surname.” 

She laughed, evidently thinking I said it in fun; and 
stooped to kiss the children—a salute to which Bruno 
submitted with reluctance: Sylvie returned it with in¬ 
terest. 

While she and Arthur (who had arrived before me) 
supplied the children with tea and cake, I tried to engage 
the Earl in conversation: but he was restless and distrait, 
and we made little progress. At last, by a sudden ques¬ 
tion, he betrayed the cause of his disquiet. 

‘‘Would you let me look at those flowers you have in 
your hand?” 

“Willingly!” I said, handing him the bouquet. Botany 
was, I knew, a favourite study of his: and these flowers 
were to me so entirely new and mysterious, that I was 
really curious to see what a botanist would say of them. 

They did not diminish his disquiet. On the contrary, 
he became every moment more excited as he turned them 
over. ‘‘These are all from Central India!” he said, laying 
aside part of the bouquet. “They are rare, even there: 
and I have never seen them in any other part of the 

world. These two are Mexican— This one-” (He rose 

hastily and carried it to the window, to examine it in a 



LIGHT COME, LIGHT GO 403 

better light, the flush of excitement mounting to his very 
forehead) “—is, I am nearly sure—but I have a book of 

Indian Botany here-” He took a volume from the 

book-shelves, and turned the leaves with trembling fin¬ 
gers. “Yes! Compare it with this picture! It is the exact 
duplicate! This is the flower of the Upas-tree, which 
usually grows only in the depths of forests; and the flower 
fades so quickly after being plucked, that it is scarcely 
possible to keep its form or colour even so far as the out¬ 
skirts of the forest! Yet this is in full bloom! Where did 
you get these flowers?” he added with breathless eager¬ 
ness. 

I glanced at Sylvie, who, gravely and silently, laid her 
finger on her lips, then beckoned to Bruno to follow her, 
and ran out into the garden; and I found myself in the 
position of a defendant whose two most important wit¬ 
nesses have been suddenly taken away. “Let me give you 
the flowers!” I stammered out at last, quite “at my wit’s 
end” as to how to get out of the difficulty. “You know 
much more about them than I do!” 

“I accept them most gratefully! But you have not yet 
told me-” the Earl was beginning, when we were inter¬ 

rupted, to my great relief, by the arrival of Eric Lindon. 

To Arthur, however, the newcomer was, I saw clearly, 
anything but welcome. His face clouded over: he drew a 
little back from the circle, and took no further part in 
the conversation, which was wholly maintained, for some 
minutes, by Lady Muriel and her lively cousin, who were 
discussing some new music that had just arrived from 
London. 

“Do just try this one!” he pleaded. “The music looks 
easy to sing at sight, and the song’s quite appropriate to 
the occasion.” 

“Then I suppose it’s 

'Five o’clock tea! 

Ever to thee 
Faithful I’ll be. 

Five o’clock tea!’ ” 



404 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

laughed Lady Muriel, as she sat down to the piano, and 
lightly struck a few random chords. 

“Not quite: and yet it is a kind of ‘ever to thee faith- 
full I’ll be!’ It’s a pair of hapless lovers: he crosses the 
briny deep: and she is left lamenting.” 

“That is indeed appropriate!” she replied mockingly, 
as he placed the song before her. “And am I to do the 
lamenting? And who for, if you please?” 

She played the air once or twice through, first in quick, 
and finally in slow, time; and then gave us the whole song 
with as much graceful ease as if she had been familiar 
with it all her life: 

"He steps so lightly to the land, 

All in his manly pride: 

He kissed her cheek, he pressed her hand, 

Yet still she glanced aside. 

'Too gay he seems,’ she darkly dreams, 

' Too gallant and too gay 

To think of me—poor simple me — 

When he is far away!’ 

'1 bring my. Love this goodly pearl 
Across the seas,’ he said: 

‘A gem to deck the dearest girl 
That ever sailor wed!’ 

She clasps it tight: her eyes are bright: 

Her throbbing heart would say 

‘He thought of me—he thought of me — 

When he was far away!’ 

The ship has sailed into the West: 

Her ocean-bird is flown: 

A dull dead pain is in her breast, 

And she is weak and lone: 

Yet there’s a smile upon her face, 

A smile that seems to say 

'He’ll think of me — he’ll think of me — 

When he is far away! 

‘Though waters wide between us glide. 

Our lives are warm and near: 



405 


LIGHT COME, LIGHT GO 

No distance parts two faithful hearts — 

Two hearts that love so dear: 

And I will trust my sailor-lad. 

For ever and a day, 

To think of me—to think of me — 

When he is far away!’ ” 

The look of displeasure, which had begun to come over 
Arthur’s face when the young Captain spoke of Love so 
lightly, faded away as the song proceeded, and he listened 
with evident delight. But his face darkened again when 
Eric demurely remarked “Don’t you think ‘my soldier- 
lad’ would have fitted the tune just as well?” 

“Why, so it would!’’ Lady Muriel gaily retorted. “Sol¬ 
diers, sailors, tinkers, tailors, what a lot of words would 
fit in! I think ‘my tinkerAaA' sounds best. Don’t you?” 

To spare my friend further pain, I rose to go, just as 
the Earl was beginning to repeat his particularly em¬ 
barrassing question about the flowers. 

“You have not yet-” 

“Yes, I’ve had some tea, thank you!” I hastily inter¬ 
rupted him. “And now we really must be going. Good 
evening, Lady Muriel!” And we made our adieux, and 
escaped, while the Earl was still absorbed in examining 
the mysterious bouquet. 

Lady Muriel accompanied us to the door. “You couldn’t 
have given my father a more acceptable present!” she 
said, warmly. “He is so passionately fond of Botany. I’m 
afraid I know nothing of the theory of it, but I keep his 
Hortus Siccus in order. I must get some sheets of blotting- 
paper, and dry these new treasures for him before they 
begin to fade.” 

"That wo’n’t be no good at all!” said Bruno, who was 
waiting for us in the garden. 

“Why wo’n’t it?” said I. “You know I had to give the 
flowers, to stop questions.” 

“Yes, it ca’n’t be helped,” said Sylvie: “but they will 
be sorry when they find them gone!” 

“But how will they go?” 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


406 

“Well, I don’t know how. But they will go. The nose¬ 
gay was only a Phlizz, you know. Bruno made it up. 

These last words were in a whisper, as she evidently 
did not wish Arthur to hear. But of this there seemed 
to be little risk: he hardly seemed to notice the children, 
but paced on, silent and abstracted; and when, at the en¬ 
trance to the wood, they bid us a hasty farewell and ran 
off, he seemed to wake out of a day-dream. 

The bouquet vanished, as Sylvie had predicted; and 
when, a day or two afterwards, Arthur and I once more 
visited the Hall, we found the Earl and his daughter, 
with the old housekeeper, out in the garden, examining 
the fastenings of the drawing-room window. 

“We are holding an Inquest,” Lady Muriel said, ad¬ 
vancing to meet us: “and we admit you, as Accessories 
before the Fact, to tell us all you know about those 
flowers.” 

“The Accessories before the Fact decline to answer any 
questions,” I gravely replied. “And they reserve their 
defence.” 

“Well then, turn Queen’s Evidence, please! The flowers 
have disappeared in the night,” she went on, turning to 
Arthur, “and we are quite sure no one in the house has 
meddled with them. Somebody must have entered by the 
window-” 

“But the fastenings have not been tampered with,” 
said the Earl. 

“It must have been while you were dining, my Lady,” 
said the housekeeper. 

“That was it,” said the Earl. “The thief must have seen 
you bring the flowers”, turning to me, “and have noticed 
that you did not take them away. And he must have 
known their great value—they are simply pricelessV’ he 
exclaimed, in sudden excitement. 

“And you never told us how you got them!” said Lady 
Muriel. 

“Some day,” I stammered, “I may be free to tell you. 
Just now, would you excuse me?” 



LIGHT COME, LIGHT GO 407 

The Earl looked disappointed, but kindly said “Very 
well, we will ask no questions”. 

“But we consider you a very bad Queen’s Evidence,” 
Lady Muriel added playfully, as we entered the arbour. 
“We pronounce you to be an accomplice: and we sen¬ 
tence you to solitary confinement, and to be fed on bread 
and—butter. Do you take sugar ? ” 

“It is disquieting, certainly,” she resumed, when all 
"creature-comforts” had been duly supplied, “to find 
that the house has been entered by a thief—in this out- 
of-the-way place. If only the flowers had been eatables, 
one might have suspected a thief of quite another 
shape-” 

“You mean that universal explanation for all mysteri¬ 
ous disappearances, ‘the cat did it’ ? ” said Arthur. 

“Yes,” she replied. “What a convenient thing it would 
be if all thieves had the same shape! It’s so confusing to 
have some of them quadrupeds and others bipeds!” 

“It has occurred to me”, said Arthur, “as a curious 
problem in Teleology—the Science of Final Causes,” he 
added, in answer to an enquiring look from Lady Muriel. 

“And a Final Cause is-?” 

“Well, suppose we say—the last of a series of connected 
events—each of the series being the cause of the next— 
for whose sake the first event takes place.” 

“But the last event is practically an effect of the first, 
isn’t it? And yet you call it a cause of it!” 

Arthur pondered a moment. “The words are rather 
confusing, I grant you,” he said. “Will this do? The last 
event is an effect of the first: but the necessity for that 
event is a cause of the necessity for the first.” 

“That seems clear enough,” said Lady Muriel. “Now 
let us have the problem.” 

“It’s merely this. What object can we imagine in the 
arrangement by which each different size (roughly 
speaking) of living creatures has its special shape? For 
instance, the human race has one kind of shape—bipeds. 
Another set, ranging from the lion to the mouse, are 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


408 

quadrupeds. Go down a step or two further, and you 
come to insects with six legs—hexapods—a beautiful 
name, is it not? But beauty, in our sense of the word, 
seems to diminish as we go down: the creature becomes 
more—I won’t say ‘ugly’ of any of God’s creatures— 
more uncouth. And, when we take the microscope, and 
go a few steps lower still, we come upon animalculae, 
terribly uncouth, and with a terrible number of legs!” 

“The other alternative,” said the Earl, “would be a 
diminuendo series of repetitions of the same type. Never 
mind the monotony of it: let’s see how it would work 
in other ways. Begin with the race of men, and the crea¬ 
tures they require: let us say horses, cattle, sheep, and 
dogs—we don’t exactly require frogs and spiders, do we, 
Muriel?” 

Lady Muriel shuddered perceptibly: it was evidently a 
painful subject. “We can dispense with them,” she said 
gravely. 

“Well, then we’ll have a second race of men, half-a- 
yard high-” 

“—who would have one source of exquisite enjoyment, 
not possessed by ordinary men!” Arthur interrupted. 

“What source?” said the Earl. 

“Why, the grandeur of scenery! Surely the grandeur 
of a mountain, to me, depends on its size, relative to me? 
Double the height of the mountain, and of course it’s 
twice as grand. Halve my height, and you produce the 
same effect.” 

"Happy, happy, happy Small!” Lady Muriel murmur¬ 
ed rapturously. “None but the Short, none but the Short, 
none but the Short enjoy the Tall!” 

“But let me go on,” said the Earl. “We’ll have a third 
race of men, five inches high; a fourth race, an inch 
high-” 

“They couldn’t eat common beef and mutton, I’m 
sure!” Lady Muriel interrupted. 

“True, my child, I was forgetting. Each set must have 
its own cattle and sheep.” 



LIGHT COME, LIGHT GO 409 

“And its own vegetation,” I added. “What could a cow, 
an inch high, do with grass that waved far above its head ? ’ ’ 

“That is true. We must have a pasture within a pas¬ 
ture, so to speak. The common grass would serve our 
inch-high cows as a green forest of palms, while round the 
root of each tall stem would stretch a tiny carpet of 
microscopic grass. Yes, I think our scheme will work 
fairly well. And it would be very interesting, coming into 
contact with the races below us. What sweet little things 
the inch-high bull-dogs would be! I doubt if even Muriel 
would run away from one of them!” 

“Don’t you think we ought to have a crescendo series, 
as well?” said Lady Muriel. “Only fancy being a hundred 
yards high! One could use an elephant as a paper-weight, 
and a crocodile as a pair of scissors!” 

"And would you have races of different sizes communi¬ 
cate with one another?” I enquired. “Would they make 
war on one another, for instance, or enter into treaties?” 

“War we must exclude, I think. When you could crush 
a whole nation with one blow of your fist, you couldn’t 
conduct war on equal terms. But anything, involving a 
collision of minds only, would be possible in our ideal 
world—for of course we must allow mental powers to 
all, irrespective of size. Perhaps the fairest rule would be 
that, the smaller the race, the greater should be its intel¬ 
lectual development! ’' 

“Do you mean to say”, said Lady Muriel, “that these 
manikins of an inch high are to argue with me?” 

“Surely, surely!” said the Earl. “An argument doesn’t 
depend for its logical force on the size of the creature that 
utters it!” 

She tossed her head indignantly. “I would not argue 
with any man less than six inches high!” she cried. “I’d 
make him workl” 

“What at?” said Arthur, listening to all this nonsense 
with an amused smile. 

"Embroidery !” she readily replied. “What lovely em¬ 
broidery they would do!” 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


410 

“Yet, if they did it wrong,” I said, “you couldn’t argue 
the question. I don’t know why: but I agree that it 
couldn’t be done.” 

“The reason is,” said Lady Muriel, “one couldn’t sacri¬ 
fice one’s dignity so far.” 

“Of course one couldn’t!” echoed Arthur. “Any more 
than one could argue with a potato. It would be alto¬ 
gether—excuse the ancient pun —infra dig .!” 

“I doubt it,” said I. “Even a pun doesn’t quite con¬ 
vince me.” 

“Well, if that is not the reason,” said Lady Muriel, 
“what reason would you give?” 

I tried hard to understand the meaning of this ques¬ 
tion: but the persistent humming of the bees confused me, 
and there was a drowsiness in the air that made every 
thought stop and go to sleep before it had got well 
thought out: so all I could say was “That must depend 
on the weight of the potato”. 

I felt the remark was not so sensible as I should have 
liked it to be. But Lady Muriel seemed to take it quite 

as a matter of course. “In that case-” she began, but 

suddenly started, and turned away to listen. “Don’t you 
hear him?” she said. “He’s crying. We must go to him, 
somehow.” 

And I said to myself “That’s very strange! I quite 
thought it was Lady Muriel talking to me. Why, it’s 
Sylvie all the while!” And I made another great effort 
to say something that should have some meaning in it. 
“Is it about the potato?” 


Chapter XXI 
Through the Ivory Door 

“I don’t know,” said Sylvie. “Hush! I must think. I 
could go to him, by myself, well enough. But I want you 
to come too.” 



THROUGH THE IVORY DOOR 4II 

“Let me go with you,” I pleaded. “I can walk as fast 
2^,you can, I’m sure.” 

Sylvie laughed merrily. “What nonsense!” she cried. 
“Why, you ca’n’t walk a bit! You’re lying quite flat on 
your back! You don’t understand these things.” 

“I can walk as well as you can,” I repeated. And I tried 
my best to walk a few steps: but the ground slipped away 
backwards, quite as fast as I could walk, so that I made 
no progress at all. Sylvie laughed again. 

“There, I told you so! You’ve no idea how funny you 
look, moving your feet about in the air, as if you were 
walking! Wait a bit. I’ll ask the Professor what we’d bet¬ 
ter do.” And she knocked at his study-door. 

The door opened, and the Professor looked out. 
“What’s that crying I heard just now?” he asked. “Is it 
a human animal?” 

“It’s a boy,” Sylvie said. 

“I’m afraid you’ve been teasing him?” 

“No, indeed I haven’t!” Sylvie said, very earnestly. “I 
never tease him!” 

“Well, I must ask the Other Professor about it.” He 
went back into the study, and we heard him whispering 
“small human animal—says she hasn’t been teasing him 
—the kind that’s called Boy-” 

“Ask her which Boy,” said a new voice. The Professor 
came out again. 

“Which Boy is it that you haven’t been teasing?” 

Sylvie looked at me with twinkling eyes. “You dear 
old thing!” she exclaimed, standing on tip-toe to kiss him, 
wiiile he gravely stooped to receive the salute. “How you 
do puzzle me! Why, there are several boys I haven’t been 
teasing!” 

The Professor returned to his friend: and this time the 
voice said “Tell her to bring them here —all of them!” 

“I ca’n't, and I wo’n’t!” Sylvie exclaimed, the moment 
he reappeared. “It’s Bruno that’s crying: and he’s my 
brother: and, please, we both want to go: he ca’n’t walk, 
you know: he’s—he’s dreaming, you know” (this in a 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


412 

whisper, for fear of hurting my feelings). “Do let’s go 
through the Ivory Door!” 

“I’ll ask him,” said the Professor, disappearing again. 
He returned directly. “He says you may. Follow me, and 
walk on tip-toe.” 

The difficulty with me would have been, just then, not 
to walk on tip-toe. It seemed very hard to reach down far 
enough to just touch the floor, as Sylvie led me through 
the study. 

The Professor went before us to unlock the Ivory 
Door. I had just time to glance at the Other Professor, 
who was sitting reading, with his back to us, before the 
Professor showed us out through the door, and locked it 
behind us. Bruno was standing with his hands over his 
face, crying bitterly. 

“What’s the matter, darling?” said Sylvie, with her 
arms round his neck. 

"Hurted mine self welly much!” sobbed the poor little 
fellow. 

“I’m so sorry, darling! How ever did you manage to 
hurt yourself so?” 

“Course I managed it!” said Bruno, laughing through 
his tears. ‘ 'Does 00 think nobody else but 00 ca’n’t manage 
things?” 

Matters were looking distinctly brighter, now Bruno 
had begun to argue. “Come, let’s hear all about it!” I 
said. 

“My foot took it into its head to slip——” Bruno be¬ 
gan. 

“A foot hasn’t got a head!” Sylvie put in, but all in 
vain. 

“I slipted down the bank. And I tripted over a stone. 
And the stone hurted my foot! And I trod on a Bee. And 
the Bee stinged my finger!” Poor Bruno sobbed again. 
The complete list of woes was too much for his feelings. 
“And it knewed I didn’t mean to trod on it!” he added, as 
the climax. 

“That Bee should be ashamed of itself!” I said severely, 



THROUGH THE IVORY DOOR 413 

and Sylvie hugged and kissed the wounded hero till all 
tears were dried. 

“My finger's quite unstung now!” said Bruno. “Why 
doos there be stones? Mister Sir, doos 00 know?” 

“They’re good for something ,” I said: “even if we don’t 
know what. What’s the good of dandelions, now?” 

“Dindledums?” said Bruno. “Oh, they're ever so 
pretty! And stones aren’t pretty, one bit. Would 00 like 
some dindledums, Mister Sir?” 

“Bruno!” Sylvie murmured reproachfully. “You 
mustn’t say 'Mister’ and ‘Sir’ both at once! Remember 
what I told you!” 

“You telled me I were to say ‘Mister’ when I spoked 
about him, and I were to say ‘Sir’ when I spoked to him!” 

“Well, you’re not doing both, you know.” 

“Ah, but I is doing bofe. Miss Praticular!” Bruno ex¬ 
claimed triumphantly. “I wishted to speak about the 
Gemplun—and I wishted to speak to the Gemplun. So a 
course I said 'Mister Sir’!” 

“That’s all right, Bruno,” I said. 

“Course it’s all right!” said Bruno. “Sylvie just knows 
nuffin at all!” 

“There never was an impertinenter boy!” said Sylvie, 
frowning till her bright eyes were nearly invisible. 

“And there never was an ignoranter girl!” retorted 
Bruno. “Come along and pick some dindledums. That’s 
all she’s fit for\” he added in a very loud whisper to me. 

“But why do you say ‘Dindledums’, Bruno? Dande¬ 
lions is the right word.” 

“It’s because he jumps about so,” Sylvie said, laugh¬ 
ing. 

"Yes, that’s it,” Bruno assented. “Sylvie tells me the 
words, and then, when I jump about, they get shooken 
up in my head—till they’re all froth!” 

I expressed myself as perfectly satisfied with this ex¬ 
planation. “But aren’t you going to pick me any dindle¬ 
dums, after all?” 

“'Course we will!” cried Bruno. “Come along, Sylvie!” 



414 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

And the happy children raced away* bounding over the 
turf with the fleetness and grace of young antelopes. 

"Then you didn’t find your way back to Outland?” I 
said to the Professor. 

"Oh yes, I did!” he replied, "We never got to Queer 
Street; but I found another way. I’ve been backwards 
and forwards several times since then. I had to be present 
at the Election, you know, as the author of the new 
Money-Act. The Emperor was so kind as to wish that / 
should have the credit of it. ‘Let come what come may,’ 
(I remember the very words of the Imperial Speech) ‘if 
it should turn out that the Warden is alive, you will bear 
witness that the change in the coinage is the Professor’s 
doing, not mineY I never was so glorified in my life, be¬ 
fore!” Tears trickled down his cheeks at the recollection, 
which apparently was not wholly a pleasant one. 

"Is the Warden supposed to be dead ?” 

“Well, it’s supposed so: but, mind you, I don’t believe 
it! The evidence is very weak—mere hear-say. A wander¬ 
ing Jester, with a Dancing-Bear (they found their way 
into the Palace, one day) has been telling people he comes 
from Fairyland, and that the Warden died there. I 
wanted the Vice-Warden to question him, but, most un¬ 
luckily, he and my Lady were always out walking when 
the Jester came round. Yes, the Warden’s supposed to be 
dead!” And more tears trickled down the old man’s 
cheeks. 

“But what is the new Money-Act?” 

The Professor brightened up again. "The Emperor 
started the thing,” he said. "He wanted to make every¬ 
body in Outland twice as rich as he was before—just to 
make the new Government popular. Only there wasn’t 
nearly enough money in the Treasury to do it. So / sug¬ 
gested that he might do it by doubling the value of every 
coin and bank-note in Outland. It’s the simplest thing 
possible. I wonder nobody ever thought of it before! And 
you never saw such universal joy. The shops are full from 
morning to night. Everybody’s buying everything!” 



THROUGH THE IVORY DOOR 415 

“And how was the glorifying done? ” 

A sudden gloom overcast the Professor’s jolly face. 
“They did it as I went home after the Election,” he 
mournfully replied. “It was kindly meant—but I didn’t 
like it! They waved flags all round me till I was nearly 
blind: and they rang bells till I was nearly deaf: and they 
strewed the road so thick with flowers that I lost my 
way!” And the poor old man sighed deeply. 

“How far is it to Outland?” I asked, to change the 
subject. 

“About five days’ march. But one must go back— 
occasionally. You see, as Court-Professor, I have to be 
always in attendance on Prince Uggug. The Empress 
would be very angry if I left him, even for an hour.” 

“But surely, every time you come here, you are absent 
ten days, at least?” 

“Oh, more than that!” the Professor exclaimed. “A 
fortnight, sometimes. But of course I keep a memoran¬ 
dum of the exact time when I started, so that I can put 
the Court-time back to the very moment!” 

“Excuse me,” I said. “I don’t understand.” 

Silently the Professor drew from his pocket a square 
gold watch, with six or eight hands, and held it out for 
my inspection. “This”, he began, “is an Outlandish 
Watch-” 

“So I should have thought.” 

“—which has the peculiar property that, instead of 
its going with the time, the time goes with it. I trust you 
understand me now? ” 

“Hardly,” I said. 

“Permit me to explain. So long as it is let alone, it 
takes its own course. Time has no effect upon it.” 

“I have known such watches,” I remarked. 

“It goes, of course, at the usual rate. Only the time has 
to go with it. Hence, if I move the hands, I change the 
time. To move them forwards, in advance of the true 
time, is impossible: but I can move them as much as a 
month backwards —that is the limit. And then you have 



416 SYLVIE AND BRtJNO 

the events all over again—with any alterations experi¬ 
ence may suggest.” 

“What a blessing such a watch would be”, I thought, 
‘‘in real life! To be able to unsay some heedless word— 
to undo some reckless deed! Might I see the thing done?” 

‘‘With pleasure!” said the good natured Professor. 
‘‘When I move this hand back to here ”, pointing out the 
place, ‘‘History goes back fifteen minutes!” 

Trembling with excitement, I watched him push the 
hand round as he described. 

‘‘Hurted mine self welly much!” 

Shrilly .and suddenly the words rang in my ears, and, 
more startled than I cared to show, I turned to look for 
the speaker. 

Yes! There was Bruno, standing with the tears run¬ 
ning down his cheeks, just as I had seen him a quarter 
of an hour ago; and there was Sylvie with her arms round 
his neck! 

I had not the heart to make the dear little fellow go 
through his troubles a second time, so hastily begged the 
Professor to push the hands round into their former 
position. In a moment Sylvie and Bruno were gone again, 
and I could just see them in the far distance, picking 
“dindledums”. 

‘ ‘Wonderful, indeed! ” I exclaimed. 

‘‘It has another property, yet more wonderful,” said 
the Professor. ‘‘You see this little peg? That is called the 
‘Reversal Peg’. If you push it in, the events of the next 
hour happen in the reverse order. Do not try it now. I 
will lend you the Watch for a few days, and you can 
amuse yourself with experiments.” 

“Thank you very much!” I said as he gave me the 
Watch. “I’ll take the greatest care of it—why, here are 
the children again!” 

“We could only but find six dindledums,” said Bruno, 
putting them into my hands, “ ’cause Sylvie said it were 
time to go back. And here’s a big blackberry for ooselfl 
We couldn’t only find but two\” 



THROUGH THE IVORY DOOR 417 

“Thank you: it’s very nice,” I said. “And I suppose you 
ate the other, Bruno?” 

“No, I didn’t,” Bruno said, carelessly. “ Aren’t they 
pretty dindledums, Mister Sir?” 

“Yes, very: but what makes you limp so, my child?” 

“Mine foot’s come hurted again!” Bruno mournfully 
replied. And he sat down on the ground, and began 
nursing it. 

The Professor held his head between his hands—an 
attitude that I knew indicated distraction of mind. 
“Better rest a minute,” he said. “It may be better then— 
or it may be worse. If only I had some of my medicines 
here! I’m Court-Physician, you know,” he added, aside to 
me. 

“Shall I go and get you some blackberries, darling?” 
Sylvie whispered, with her arms round his neck; and 
she kissed away a tear that was trickling down his 
cheek. 

Bruno brightened up in a moment. “That are a good 
plan!” he exclaimed. "I thinks my foot would come quite 
unhurted, if I eated a blackberry—two or three black¬ 
berries—six or seven blackberries-” 

Sylvie got up hastily. “I'd better go”, she said, aside 
to me, “before he gets into the double figures!” 

“Let me come and help you,” I said. “I can reach 
higher up than you can.” 

“Yes, please,” said Sylvie, putting her hand into mine: 
and we walked off together. 

“Bruno loves blackberries,” she said, as we paced slow¬ 
ly along by a tall hedge, that looked a promising place 
for them, “and it was so sweet of him to make me eat the 
only one!” 

“Oh, it was you that ate it, then? Bruno didn’t seem to 
like to tell me about it. ” 

“No; I saw that,” said Sylvie. “He's always afraid of 
being praised. But he made me eat it, really! I wbuld 
much rather he—oh, what's that?” And she clung to my 
hand, half-frightened, as we came in sight of a hare, lying 



4l8 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

on its side with legs stretched out, just in the entrance to 
the wood. 

“It’s a hare, my child. Perhaps it’s asleep.” 

“No, it isn’t asleep,” Sylvie said, timidly going nearer 

to look at it: “it’s eyes are open. Is it—is it-” her 

voice dropped to an awe-struck whisper, “is it dead, do 
you think?” 

“Yes, it's quite dead,” I said, after stooping to examine 
it. “Poor thing! I think it’s been hunted to death. I know 
the harriers were out yesterday. But they haven’t 
touched it. Perhaps they caught sight of another, and left 
it to die of fright and exhaustion.” 

"Hunted to death ?” Sylvie repeated to herself, very 
slowly and sadly. “I thought hunting was a thing they 
played at—like a game. Bruno and I hunt snails: but we 
never hurt them when we catch them!” 

“Sweet angel!” I thought. "How am I to get the idea 
of Sport into your innocent mind?” And as we stood, 
hand-in-hand, looking down at the dead hare, I tried to 
put the thing into such words as she could understand. 
“You know what fierce wild-beasts lions and tigers are?” 
Sylvie nodded. “Well, in some countries men have to kill 
them, to save their own lives, you know.” 

“Yes,” said Sylvie: “if one tried to kill me, Bruno 
would kill it —if he could.” 

“Well, and so the men—the hunters—get to enjoy it, 
you know: the running, and the fighting, and the shout¬ 
ing, and the danger.” 

“Yes,” said Sylvie. “Bruno likes danger.” 

“Well, but, in this country, there aren't any lions and 
tigers, loose: so they hunt other creatures, you see.” I 
hoped, but in vain, that this would satisfy her, and that 
she would ask no more questions. 

“They hunt foxes,” Sylvie said, thoughtfully. “And I 
think they kill them, too. Foxes are very fierce. I daresay 
men don’t love them. Are hares fierce?” 

“No,” I said, "A hare is a sweet, gentle, timid animal— 
almost as gentle as a lamb.” 



THROUGH THE IVORY DOOR 419 

“But, if men love hares, why—why-” her voice 

quivered, and her sweet eyes were brimming over with 
tears. 

“I'm afraid they don’t love them, dear child.” 

“All children love them,” Sylvie said. “All ladies love 

them. ” 

"I'm afraid even ladies go to hunt them sometimes.” 

Sylvie shuddered. “Oh, no, not ladiesl” she earnestly 
pleaded. “Not Lady Muriel!” 

“No, she never does, I'm sure—but this is too sad a 
sight for you, dear. Let’s try and find some-” 

But Sylvie was not satisfied yet. In a hushed, solemn 
tone, with bowed head and clasped hands, she put her 
final question. “Does God love hares?” 

“Yes!” I said. “I'm sure He does! He loves every living 
thing. Even sinful men. How much more the animals, 
that cannot sin!” 

“I don’t know what 'sin' means,” said Sylvie. And I 
didn’t try to explain it. 

"Come, my child,” I said, trying to lead her away. 
“Wish good-bye to the poor hare, and come and look for 
blackberries.” 

“Good-bye, poor hare!” Sylvie obediently repeated, 
looking over her shoulder at it as we turned away. And 

then, all in a moment, her self-command gave way. Pull¬ 
ing her hand out of mine, she ran back to where the 
dead hare was lying, and flung herself down at its side 
in such an agony of grief as I could hardly have believed 
possible in so young a child. 

"Oh, my darling, my darling!” she moaned over and 
over again. “And God meant your life to be so beautiful!” 

Sometimes, but always keeping her face hidden on the 
ground, she would reach out one little hand, to stroke 
the poor dead thing, and then once more bury her face 
in her hands, and sob as if her heart would break. 

I was afraid she would really make herself ill: still I 
thought it best to let her weep away the first sharp agony 
of grief: and, after a few minutes, the sobbing gradually 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


420 

ceased, and Sylvie rose to her feet, and looked calmly 
at me, though tears were still streaming down her cheeks. 

I did not dare to speak again, just yet; but simply held 
out my hand to her, that we might quit the melancholy 
spot. 

"Yes, I’ll come now,” she said. Very reverently she 
kneeled down, and kissed the dead hare; then rose and 
gave me her hand, and we moved on in silence. 

A child’s sorrow is violent, but short; and it was almost 
in her usual voice that she said, after a minute, "Oh, 
stop, stop! Here are some lovely blackberries!” 

We filled our hands with fruit, and returned in all 
haste to where the Professor and Bruno were seated on a 
bank, awaiting our return. 

Just before we came within hearing-distance, Sylvie 
checked me. "Please don’t tell Bruno about the hare!” 
she said. 

"Very well, my child! But why not ?” 

Tears again glittered in those sweet eyes, and she turned 
her head away, so that I could scarcely hear her reply. 
"He’s—he’s very fond of gentle creatures, you know. And 
he’d—he’d be so sorry! I don’t want him to be made 
sorry.” 

"And your agony of sorrow is to count for nothing, 
then, sweet unselfish child!” I thought to myself. But no 
more was said till we had reached our friends; and Bruno 
was far too much engrossed, in the feast we had brought 
him, to take any notice of Sylvie’s unusually grave manner. 

"I’m afraid it’s getting rather late, Professor?” I said. 

"Yes, indeed,” said the Professor. "I must take you all 
through the Ivory Door again. You’ve stayed your full 
time.” 

"Mightn’t we stay a little longer!” pleaded Sylvie. 

"Just owe minute!” added Bruno. 

But the Professor was unyielding. "It’s a great privi¬ 
lege, coming through at all,” he said. "We must go now.” 
And we followed him obediently to the Ivory Door, which 
he threw open, and signed to me to go through first. 



CROSSING THE LINE 


421 


“You’re coming too, aren't you?” I said to Sylvie. 

“Yes,” she said: “but you wo’n’t see us after you’ve 
gone through.” 

“But suppose I wait for you outside?” I asked, as I 
stepped through the doorway. 

“In that case/’ said Sylvie, "I think the potato would 
be quite justified in asking your weight. I can quite 
imagine a really superior kidney-potato declining to 
argue with any one under fifteen stone!” 

With a great effort I recovered the thread of my 
thoughts. “We lapse very quickly into nonsense!” I said. 


Chapter XXII 
Crossing the Line 

“Let us lapse back again,” said Lady Muriel. “Take an¬ 
other cup of tea? I hope that’s sound common sense?” 

“And all that strange adventure”, I thought, “has 
occupied the space of a single comma in Lady Muriel’s 
speech! A single comma, for which grammarians tell us 
to ‘count one’\” (I felt no doubt that the Professor had 
kindly put back the time for me, to the exact point at 
which I had gone to sleep.) 

When a few minutes afterwards, we left the house, 
Arthur’s first remark was certainly a strange one. “We’ve 
been there just twenty minutes,” he said, “and I’ve done 
nothing but listen to you and Lady Muriel talking: and 
yet, somehow, I feel exactly as if I had been talking with 
her for an hour at least!” 

And so he had been, I felt no doubt: only, as the time 
had been put back to the beginning of the tete-a-tete he 
referred to, the whole of it had passed into oblivion, if not 
into nothingness! But I valued my own reputation for 
sanity too highly to venture on explaining to him what 
had happened. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


422 

For some cause, which I could not at the moment 
divine, Arthur was unusually grave and silent during our 
walk home. It could not be connected with Eric Lindon, 
I thought, as he had for some days been away in London: 
so that, having Lady Muriel almost "all to himself”—for 
I was only too glad to hear those two conversing, to have 
any wish to intrude any remarks of my own—he ought, 
theoretically, to have been specially radiant and con¬ 
tented with life. "Can he have heard any bad news?" I 
said to myself. And, almost as if he had read my thoughts, 
he spoke. 

"He will be here by the last train," he said, in the tone 
of one who is continuing a conversation rather than 
beginning one. 

"Captain Lindon, do you mean?" 

"Yes—Captain Lindon,” said Arthur: "I said ‘he’, 
because I fancied we were talking about him. The Earl 
told me he comes to-night, though to-morrow is the day 
when he will know about the Commission that he’s 
hoping for. I wonder he doesn’t stay another day to hear 
the result, if he’s really so anxious about it as the Earl 
believes he is.” 

"He can have a telegram sent after him,” I said: "but 
it’s not very soldier-like, running away from possible bad 
news!” 

"He’s a very good fellow,” said Arthur: "but I confess 
it would be good news for me, if he got his Commission, 
and his Marching Orders all at once! I wish him all happi¬ 
ness—with one exception. Good night!” (We had reached 
home by this time.) “I’m not good company to-night— 
better be alone.” 

It was much the same, next day. Arthur declared he 
wasn’t fit for Society, and I had to set forth alone for an 
afternoon-stroll. I took the road to the Station, and, at 
the point where the road from the "Hall” joined it, I 
paused, seeing my friends in the distance, seemingly 
bound for the same goal. 

"Will you join us?” the Earl said, after I had ex- 



CROSSING THE LINE 


423 

changed greetings with him, and Lady Muriel, and Cap¬ 
tain Lindon. “This restless young man is expecting a 
telegram, and we are going to the Station to meet it.” 

"There is also a restless young woman in the case,” 
Lady Muriel added. 

“That goes without saying, my child,” said her father. 
"Women are always restless!” 

“For generous appreciation of all one’s best qualities,” 
his daughter impressively remarked, “there’s nothing to 
compare with a father, is there, Eric?” 

“Cousins are not ‘in it’,” said Eric: and then somehow 
the conversation lapsed into two duologues, the younger 
folk taking the lead, and the two old men following with 
less eager steps. 

"And when are we to see your little friends again?” 
said the Earl. “They are singularly attractive children.” 

“I shall be delighted to bring them, when I can,” I said. 
“But I don’t know, myself, when I am likely to see them 
again.” 

"I’m not going to question you,” said the Earl: “but 
there’s no harm in mentioning that Muriel is simply tor¬ 
mented with curiosity! We know most of the people 
about here, and she has been vainly trying to guess what 
house they can possibly be staying at.” 

“Some day I may be able to enlighten her: but just at 
present-” 

“Thanks. She must bear it as best she can. I tell her it’s 
a grand opportunity for practising patience. But she 
hardly sees it from that point of view. Why, there are the 
children!” 

So indeed they were: waiting (for us, apparently) at a 
stile, which they could not have climbed over more than 
a few moments, as Lady Muriel and her cousin had 
passed it without seeing them. On catching sight of us, 
Bruno ran to meet us, and to exhibit to us, with much 
pride, the handle of a clasp-knife—the blade having been 
broken off—which he had picked up in the road. 

“And what shall you use it for, Bruno ? ” I said. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


424 

“Don’t know,” Bruno carelessly replied: “must think.” 

“A child’s first view of life”, the Earl remarked, with 
that sweet sad smile of his, “is that it is a period to be 
spent in accumulating portable property. That view gets 
modified as the years glide away.” And he held out his 
hand to Sylvie, who had placed herself by me, looking a 
little shy of him. 

But the gentle old man was not one with whom any 
child, hmnan of fairy, could be shy for long; and she had 
very soon deserted my hand for his—Bruno alone remain¬ 
ing faithful to his first friend. We overtook the other 
couple just as they reached the Station, and both Lady 
Muriel and Eric greeted the children as old friends—the 
latter with the words “So you got to Babylon by candle¬ 
light, after all?” 

“Yes, and back again!” cried Bruno. 

Lady Muriel looked from one to the other in blank 
astonishment. “What, you know them, Eric?” she ex¬ 
claimed. “This mystery grows deeper every day!” 

“Then we must be somewhere in the Third Act,” said 
Eric. “You don’t expect the mystery to be cleared up till 
the Fifth Act, do you?” 

“But it’s such a long drama!” w r as the plaintive reply. 
“We must have got to the Fifth Act by this time!” 

“Third Act, I assure you,” said the young soldier merci¬ 
lessly. “Scene, a railway-platform. Lights down. Enter 
Prince (in disguise, of course) and faithful Attendant. 
This is the Prince—” (taking Bruno’s hand) “and here 
stands his humble Servant! What is your Royal High¬ 
ness’s next command?” And he made a most courtier-like 
low bow to his puzzled little friend. 

“Oo’re not a Servant!” Bruno scornfully exclaimed. 
“Oo’re a GemplunY’ 

“Servant, I assure your Royal Highness!” Eric respect¬ 
fully insisted. “Allow me to mention to your Royal High¬ 
ness my various situations—past, present, and future.” 

“What did 00 begin wiz?” Bruno asked, beginning to 
enter into the jest. “Was 00 a shoe-black?” 



CROSSING THE LINE 


425 

“Lower than that, your Royal Highness! Years ago, I 
offered myself as a Slave —as a ‘Confidential Slave’, I 
think it’s called?” he asked, turning to Lady Muriel. 

But Lady Muriel heard him not: something had gone 
wrong with her glove, which entirely engrossed her 
attention. 

“Did 00 get the place?” said Bruno. 

“Sad to say, your Royal Highness, I did not\ So I had 
to take a situation as—as Waiter, which I have now held 
for some years—haven’t I?” He again glanced at Lady 
Muriel. 

“Sylvie dear, do help me to button this glove!” Lady 
Muriel whispered, hastily stooping down, and failing to 
hear the question. 

“And what will 00 be next?” said Bruno. 

“My next place will, I hope, be that of Groom. And 
after that-” 

“Don’t puzzle the child so!” Lady Muriel interrupted. 
“What nonsense you talk!” 

“—after that,” Eric persisted, “I hope to obtain the 
situation of Housekeeper , which —Fourth Act!” he pro¬ 
claimed, with a sudden change of tone. “Lights turned 
up. Red lights. Green lights. Distant rumble heard. Enter 
a passenger-train! ’ ’ 

And in another minute the train drew up alongside of 
the platform, and a stream of passengers began to flow 
out from the booking office and waiting-rooms. 

“Did you ever make real life into a drama?” said the 
Earl. “Now just try. I’ve often amused myself that way. 
Consider this platform as our stage. Good entrances and 
exits on both sides, you see. Capital background scene: 
real engine moving up and down. All this bustle, and 
people passing to and fro, must have been most carefully 
rehearsed! How naturally they do it! With never a glance 
at the audience! And every grouping is quite fresh, you 
see. No repetition!” 

It really was admirable, as soon as I began to enter into 
it from this point of view. Even a porter passing, with a 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


426 

barrow piled with luggage, seemed so realistic that one 
was tempted to applaud. He was followed by an angry 
mother, with hot red face, dragging along two screaming 
children, and calling, to some one behind, “John! Come 
on!” Enter, John, very meek, very silent, and loaded with 
parcels. And he was followed, in his turn, by a frightened 
little nursemaid, carrying a fat baby, also screaming. All 
the children screamed. 

“Capital byplay!” said the old man aside. “Did you 
notice the nursemaid’s look of terror? It was simply 
perfect'.” 

“You have struck quite a new vein,” I said. “To most 
of us Life and its pleasures seem like a mine that is nearly 
worked out.” 

“Worked out!” exclaimed the Earl. “For any one with 
true dramatic instincts, it is only the Overture that is 
ended! The real treat has yet to begin. You go to a theatre, 
and pay your ten shillings for a stall, and what do you get 
for your money? Perhaps it’s a dialogue between a couple 
of farmers—unnatural in their overdone caricature of 
farmers’ dress—more unnatural in their constrained atti¬ 
tudes and gestures—most unnatural in their attempts at 
ease and geniality in their talk. Go instead and take a seat 
in a third-class railway-carriage, and you’ll get the same 
dialogue done to the life\ Front-seats—no orchestra to 
block the view—and nothing to pay!” 

“Which reminds me,” said Eric. “There is nothing to 
.pay on receiving a telegram! Shall we enquire for one?” 
And he and Lady Muriel strolled off in the direction of 
the Telegraph-Ofhce. 

“I wonder if Shakespeare had that thought in his 
mind”, I said, “when he wrote ‘All the world’s a 
stage’?” 

The old man sighed. “And so it is,” he said, “look at it 
as you will. Life is indeed a drama; a drama with but few 
encores —and no bouquets'.” he added dreamily. “We 
spend one half of it in regretting the things we did in the 
other half!” 



CROSSING THE LINE 427 

“And the secret of enjoying it”, he continued, resuming 
his cheerful tone, “is intensity !” 

“But not in the modern aesthetic sense, I presume? 
Like the young lady, in Punch, who begins a conversation 
with ‘Are you intense ?’ ” 

“By no means!” replied the Earl. “What I mean is in¬ 
tensity of thought —a concentrated attention. We lose half 
the pleasure we might have in Life, by not really attend¬ 
ing. Take any instance you like: it doesn’t matter how 
trivial the pleasure may be—the principle is the same. 
Suppose A and B are reading the same second-rate cir¬ 
culating-library novel. A never troubles himself to master 
the relationships of the characters, on which perhaps all 
the interest of the story depends: he ‘skips’ over all the 
descriptions of scenery, and every passage that looks 
rather dull: he doesn't half attend to the passages he does 
read: he goes on reading—merely from want of resolution 
to find another occupation—for hours after he ought to 
have put the book aside: and reaches the ‘finis’ in a state 
of utter weariness and depression! B puts his whole soul 
into the thing—on the principle that 'whatever is worth 
doing is worth doing well ’: he masters the genealogies: he 
calls up pictures before his ‘mind’s eye’ as he reads about 
the scenery: best of all, he resolutely shuts the book at the 
end of some chapter, while his interest is yet at its keenest, 
and turns to other subjects; so that, when next he allows 
himself an hour at it, it is like a hungry man sitting down 
to dinner: and, when the book is finished, he returns to 
the work of his daily life like ‘a giant refreshed’!” 

“But suppose the book were really rubbish— nothing to 
repay attention ? ’ ’ 

“Well, suppose it,” said the Earl. “My theory meets 
that case, I assure you! A never finds out that it is rubbish, 
but maunders on to the end, trying to believe he’s en¬ 
joying himself. B quietly shuts the book, when he’s read a 
dozen pages, walks off to the Library, and changes it for 
a better! I have yet another theory for adding to the 
enjoyment of Life—that is, if I have not exhausted your 



428 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

patience? I’m afraid you find me a very garrulous old 
man.” 

“No indeed!” I exclaimed earnestly. And indeed I felt 
as if one could not easily tire of the sweet sadness of that 
gentle voice. 

‘‘It is, that we should learn to take our pleasures 
quickly, and our pains slowly.” 

“But why ? I should have put it the other way, myself.' ’ 

“By taking artificial pain—which can be as trivial as 
you please— slowly, the result is that, when real pain 
comes, however severe, all you need do is to let it go at its 
ordinary pace, and it’s over in a moment!” 

“Very true,” I said, “but how about the pleasure}” 

“Why, by taking it quick, you can get so much more 
into life. It takes you three hours and a half to hear and 
enjoy an opera. Suppose I can take it in, and enjoy it, in 
half-an-hour. Why, I can enjoy seven operas, while you 
are listening to onel” 

“Always supposing you have an orchestra capable of 
playing them,” I said. “And that orchestra has yet to be 
found!” 

The old man smiled. “I have heard an air played,” he 
said, “and by no means a short one—played right through, 
variations and all, in three seconds!” 

“When? And how?” I asked eagerly, with a half-notion 
that I was dreaming again. 

“It was done by a little musical-box,” he quietly re¬ 
plied. “After it had been wound up, the regulator, or 
something, broke, and it ran down, as I said, in about 
three seconds. But it must have played all the notes, you 
know!” 

“Did you enjoy it?” I asked, with all the severity of a 
cross-examining barrister. 

“No, I didn't!” he candidly confessed. “But then, you 
know, I hadn’t been trained to that kind of music!” 

“I should much like to try your plan,” I said, and, as 
Sylvie and Bruno happened to run up to us at the 
moment, I left them to keep the Earl company, and 



CROSSING THE LINE 


429 

strolled along the platform, making each person and 
event play its part in an extempore drama for my especial 
benefit. “What, is the Earl tired of you already?” I said, 
as the children ran past me. 

“No!” Sylvie replied with great emphasis. “He wants 
the evening-paper. So Bruno’s going to be a little news- 
boy!” 

“Mind you charge a good price for it!” I called after 
them. 

Returning up the platform, I came upon Sylvie alone. 

“Well, child,” I .said, “where’s your little news-boy? 
Couldn’t he get you an evening-paper?” 

“He went to get one at the book-stall at the other side,” 
said Sylvie; “and he’s coming across the line with it—oh, 
Bruno, you ought to cross by the bridge!” for the distant 
thud, thud, of the Express was already audible. Suddenly 
a look of horror came over her face. “Oh, he’s fallen down 
on the rails!” she cried, and darted past me at a speed 
that quite defied the hasty effort I made to stop her. 

But the wheezy old Station-Master happened to be 
close behind me: he wasn’t good for much, poor old man, 
but he was good for this; and, before I could turn round, 
he had the child clasped in his arms, saved from the 
certain death she was rushing to. So intent was I in 
watching this scene, that I hardly saw a flying figure in a 
light grey suit, who shot across from the back of the plat¬ 
form, and was on the line in another second. So far as one 
could take note of time in such a moment of horror, he 
had about ten clear seconds, before the Express would be 
upon him, in which to cross the rails and to pick up Bruno. 
Whether he did so or not it was quite impossible to guess: 
the next thing one knew was that the Express had passed, 
and that, whether for life or death, all was over. When the 
cloud of dust had cleared away, and the line was once 
more visible, we saw with thankful hearts that the child 
and his deliverer were safe. 

“All right!” Eric called to us cheerfully, as he recrossed 
the line. “He’s more frightened than hurt!” 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


430 

He lifted the little fellow up into Lady Muriel's arms, 
and mounted the platform as gaily as if nothing had hap¬ 
pened: but he was as pale as death, and leaned heavily on 
the arm I hastily offered him, fearing he was about to 

faint. “I'll just—sit down a moment-"he said dreamily: 

“—where’s Sylvie?” 

Sylvie ran to him, and flung her arms round his neck, 
sobbing as if her heart would break. "Don’t do that, my 
darling!” Eric murmured, with a strange look in his eyes. 
"Nothing to cry about now, you know. But you very 
nearly got yourself killed for nothing!” 

"For Bruno!” the little maiden sobbed. "And he would 
have done it for me. Wouldn’t you, Bruno?” 

"Course I would!” Bruno said, looking round with a 
bewildered air. 

Lady Muriel kissed him in silence as she put him down 
out of her arms. Then she beckoned Sylvie to come and 
take his hand, and signed to the children to go back to 
where the Earl was seated. "Tell him,” she whispered with 
quivering lips, "tell him—all is well!” Then she turned to 
the hero of the day. "I thought it was death,” she said. 
"Thank God, you are safe! Did you see how near it was?” 

"I saw there was just time,” Eric said lightly. "A 
soldier must learn to carry his life in his hand, you know. 
I’m all right now. Shall we go to the telegraph-office 
again? I daresay it’s come by this time.” 

I went to join the Earl and the children, and we waited 
—almost in silence, for no one seemed inclined to talk, 
and Bruno was half-asleep on Sylvie’s lap—till the others 
joined us. No telegram had come. 

"I’ll take a stroll with the children,” I said, feeling that 
we were a little de trop, "and I’ll look in, in the course of 
the evening.” 

"We must go back into the wood, now,” Sylvie said, as 
soon as we were out of hearing. "We ca’n’t stay this size 
any longer.” 

"Then you will be quite tiny Fairies, again, next time 
we meet?” 



AN OUTLANDISH WATCH 


431 

“Yes,” said Sylvie: “but we’ll be children again some 
day—if you’ll let us. Bruno’s very anxious to see Lady 
Muriel again.” 

“She are welly nice,” said Bruno. 

“I shall be very glad to take you to see her again,” I 
said. “Hadn't I better give you back the Professor’s 
Watch? It’ll be too large for you to carry when you’re 
Fairies, you know.” 

Bruno laughed merrily. I was glad to see he had quite 
recovered from the terrible scene he had gone through. 
“Oh, no, it wo’n’t!” he said. “When we go small, it’ll go 
small!” 

“And then it’ll go straight to the Professor,” Sylvie 
added, “and you wo’n’t be able to use it any more: so 
you’d better use it all you can, now. We must go small 
when the sun sets. Good-bye!” 

“Good-bye!” cried Bruno. But their voices sounded 
very far away, and, when I looked round, both children 
had disappeared. 

“And it wants only two hours to sunset!” I said as I 
strolled on. “I must make the best of my time!” 


Chapter XXIII 
An Outlandish Watch 

As I entered the little town, I came upon two of the 
fishermen’s wives interchanging that last word “which 
never was the last”: and it occurred to me, as an experi¬ 
ment with the Magic Watch, to wait till the little scene 
was over, and then to “encore” it. 

“Well, good night t’ye! And ye winna forget to send us 
word when your Martha writes?” 

“Nay, ah winna forget. An’ if she isn’t suited, she can 
but coom back. Good night t’ye!” 

A casual observer might have thought “and there ends 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


432 

the dialogue!” That casual observer would have been 
mistaken. 

“Ah, she’ll like ’em, I war’n’ ye! They’ll not treat her 
bad, yer may depend. They’re varry canny fowk. Good 
night!” 

“Ay, they are that! Good night!” 

“Good night! And ye'll send us word if she writes?” 

“Aye, ah will, yer may depend! Good night t’ye!” 

And at last they parted. I waited till they were some 
twenty yards apart, and then put the Watch a minute 
back. The instantaneous change was startling: the two 
figures seemed to flash back into their former places. 

“—isn’t suited, she can but coom back. Good night 
t’ye!” one of them was saying: and so the whole dialogue 
was repeated, and, when they had parted for the second 
time, I let them go their several ways, and strolled on 
through the town. 

“But the real usefulness of this magic power”, I 
thought, “would be to undo some harm, some painful 

event, some accident-” I had not long to wait for an 

opportunity of testing this property also of the Magic 
Watch, for, even as the thought passed through my mind, 
the accident I was imagining occurred. A light cart was 
standing at the door of the “Great Millinery Depdt” of 
Elveston, laden with card-board packing-cases, which the 
driver was carrying into the shop, one by one. One of the 
cases had fallen into the street, but it scarcely seemed 
worth while to step forward and pick it up, as the man 
would be back again in a moment. Yet, in that moment, a 
young man riding a bicycle came sharp round the corner 
of the street and, in trying to avoid running over the box, 
upset his machine, and was thrown headlong against the 
wheel of the spring-cart. The driver ran out to his assist¬ 
ance, and he and I together raised the unfortunate cyclist 
and carried him into the shop. His head was cut and 
bleeding; and one knee seemed to be badly injured; and it 
was speedily settled that he had better be conveyed at 
once to the only Surgery in the place. I helped them in 



AN OUTLANDISH WATCH 433 

emptying the cart, and placing in it some pillows for th e 
wounded man to rest on; and it was only when the driver 
had mounted to his place, and was starting for the 
Surgery, that I bethought me of the strange power I 
possessed of undoing all this harm. 

“Now is my time!” I said to myself, as I moved back 
the hand of the Watch, and saw, almost without sur¬ 
prise this time, all things restored to the places they had 
occupied at the critical moment when I had first noticed 
the fallen packing-case. 

Instantly I stepped out into the street, picked up the 
box, and replaced it in the cart: in the next moment the 
bicycle had spun round the corner, passed the cart with¬ 
out let or hindrance, and soon vanished in the distance, 
in a cloud of dust. 

“Delightful power of magic!” I thought. “How much 
of human suffering I have—not only relieved, but actually 
annihilated!” And, in a glow of conscious virtue, I stood 
watching the unloading of the cart, still holding the 
Magic Watch open in my hand, as I was curious to see 
what would happen when we again reached the exact 
time at which I had put back the hand. 

The result was one that, if only I had considered the 
thing carefully, I might have foreseen: as the hand of the 
Watch touched the mark, the spring-cart—which had 
driven off, and was by this time half-way down the street, 
was back again at the door, and in the act of starting, 
while—oh woe for the golden dream of world-wide 
benevolence that had dazzled my dreaming fancy!—the 
wounded youth was once more reclining on the heap of 
pillows, his pale face set rigidly in the hard lines that told 
of pain resolutely endured. 

“Oh mocking Magic Watch!” I said to myself, as I 
passed out of the little town, and took the seaward road 
that led to my lodgings. “The good I fancied I could do is 
vanished like a dream: the evil of this troublesome world 
is the only abiding reality!” 

And now I must record an experience so strange, that I 


p 


L.C. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


434 

think it only fair, before beginning to relate it, to release 
my much-enduring reader from any obligation he may 
feel to believe this part of my story, I would not have 
believed it, I freely confess, if I had not seen it with my 
own eyes: then why should I expect it of my reader, who, 
quite possibly, has never seen anything of the sort? 

I was passing a pretty little villa, which stood rather 
back from the road, in its own grounds, with bright 
flower-beds in front—creepers wandering over the walls 
and hanging in festoons about the bow-windows—an easy- 
chair forgotten on the lawn, with a newspaper lying near 
it—a small pug-dog “couchant” before it, resolved to 
guard the treasure even at the sacrifice of life—and a 
front-door standing invitingly half-open. “Here is my 
chance’’, I thought, “for testing the reverse action of the 
Magic Watch!” I pressed the “reversal-peg” and walked 
in. In another house, the entrance of a stranger might 
cause surprise—perhaps anger, even going so far as to 
expel the said stranger with violence: but here, I knew, 
nothing of the sort could happen. The ordinary course of 
events—first, to think nothing about me; then, hearing 
my footsteps to look up and see me; and then to wonder 
what business I had there—would be reversed by the 
action of my Watch. They would first wonder who I was, 
then see me, then look down, and think no more about me. 
And as to being expelled with violence, that event would 
necessarily come first in this case. “So, if I can once get 
in,” I said to myself, “all risk of expulsion will be over!” 

The pug-dog sat up, as a precautionary measure, as I 
passed; but, as I took no notice of the treasure he was 
guarding, he let me go by without even one remonstrant 
bark. “He that takes my life,” he seemed to be saying, 
wheezily, to himself, "takes trash: But he that takes the 

Daily Telegraph -!” But this awful contingency I did 

not face. 

The party in the drawing-room—I had walked straight 
in, you understand, without ringing the bell, or giving 
any notice of my approach—consisted of four laughing 



AN OUTLANDISH WATCH 435 

rosy children, of ages from about fourteen down to ten, 
who were, apparently, all coming towards the door (I 
found they were really walking backwards), while their 
mother, seated by the fire with some needle-work on her 
lap, was saying, just as I entered the room, “Now, girls, 
you may get your things on for a walk.” 

To my utter astonishment—for I was not yet accus¬ 
tomed to the action of the Watch—“all smiles ceased” (as 
Browning says) on the four pretty faces, and they all got 
out pieces of needle-work, and sat down. No one noticed 
me in the least, as I quietly took a chair and sat down to 
watch them. 

When the needle-work had been unfolded, and they 
were all ready to begin, their mother said “Come, that’s 
done, at last! You may fold up your work, girls.” But the 
children took no notice whatever of the remark; on the 
contrary, they set to work at once sewing—if that is the 
proper word to describe an operation such as / had never 
before witnessed. Each of them threaded her needle with 
a short end of thread attached to the work, which was in¬ 
stantly pulled by an invisible force through the stuff, 
dragging the needle after it: the nimble fingers of the little 
sempstress caught it at the other side, but only to lose it 
again the next moment. And so the work went on, 
steadily undoing itself, and the neatly-stitched little 
dresses, or whatever they were, steadily falling to pieces. 
Now and then one of the children would pause, as the 
recovered thread became inconveniently long, wind it on 
a bobbin, and start again with another short end. 

At last all the work was picked to pieces and put away, 
and the lady led the way into the next room, walking 
backwards, and making the insane remark “Not yet, 
dear: we must get the sewing done first.” After which, I 
was not surprised to see the children skipping backwards 
after her, exclaiming “Oh, mother, it is such a lovely day 
for a walk!” 

In the dining-room, the table had only dirty plates and 
empty dishes on it. However the party—with the addition 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


436 

of a gentleman, as good-natured, and as rosy, as the chil¬ 
dren—seated themselves at it very contentedly. 

You have seen people eating cherry-tart, and every now 
and then cautiously conveying a cherry-stone from their 
lips to their plates? Well, something like that went on all 
through this ghastly—or shall we say “ghostly”?—ban¬ 
quet. An empty fork is raised to the lips: there it receives 
a neatly-cut piece of mutton, and swiftly conveys it to the 
plate, where it instantly attaches itself to the mutton 
already there. Soon one of the plates, furnished with a 
complete slice of mutton and two potatoes, was handed 
up to the presiding gentleman, who quietly replaced the 
slice on the joint, and the potatoes in the dish. 

Their conversation was, if possible, more bewildering 
than their mode of dining. It began by the youngest girl 
suddenly, and without provocation, addressing her eldest 
sister. “Oh, you wicked story-teller!” she said. 

I expected a sharp reply from the sister; but, instead of 
this, she turned laughingly to her father, and said, in a 
very loud stage-whisper, “To be a bride!” 

The father, in order to do his part in a conversation that 
seemed only fit for lunatics, replied “Whisper it to me, 
dear.” 

But she didn’t whisper (these children never did any¬ 
thing they were told): she said, quite loud, “Of course 
not! Everybody knows what Dolly wants!” 

And little Dolly shrugged her shoulders, and said, with 
a pretty pettishness, "Now, Father, you’re not to tease! 
You know I don’t want to be bride’s-maid to anybodyX” 

"And Dolly’s to be the fourth,” was her father’s idiotic 
reply. 

Here Number Three put in her oar. “Oh, it is settled, 
Mother dear, really and truly! Mary told us all about it. 
It’s to be next Tuesday four weeks—and three of her 
cousins are coming to be bride’s-maids—and-” 

“She doesn't forget it Minnie!” the Mother laughingly 
replied. “I do wish they’d get it settled! I don’t like long 
engagements.” 


AN OUTLANDISH WATCH 437 

And Minnie wound up the conversation—if so chaotic a 
series of remarks deserves the name—with “Only think! 
We passed the Cedars this morning, just exactly as Mary 
Davenant was standing at the gate, wishing good-bye to 
Mister—I forget his name. Of course we looked the other 
way.” 

By this time I was so hopelessly confused that I gave 
up listening, and followed the dinner down into the 
kitchen. 

But to you, O hypercritical reader, resolute to believe 
no item of this weird adventure, what need to tell how the 
mutton was placed on the spit, and slowly unroasted— 
how the potatoes were wrapped in their skins, and handed 
over to the gardener to be buried—how, when the mutton 
had at length attained to rawness, the fire, which had 
gradually changed from red-heat to a mere blaze, died 
down so suddenly that the cook had only just time to 
catch its last flicker on the end of a match—or how the 
maid, having taken the mutton off the spit, carried it 
(backwards, of course) out of the house, to meet the 
butcher, who was coming (also backwards) down the 
road? 

The longer I thought over this strange adventure, the 
more hopelessly tangled the mystery became: and it was a 
real relief to meet Arthur in the road, and get him to go 
with me up to the Hall, to learn what news the telegraph 
had brought. I told him, as we went, what had happened 
at the Station, but as to my further adventures I thought 
it best, for the present, to say nothing. 

The Earl was sitting alone when we entered. “I am glad 
you are come in to keep me company,” he said. “Muriel is 
gone to bed—the excitement of that terrible scene was 
too much for her—and Eric has gone to the hotel to pack 
his things, to start for London by the early train.” 

“Then the telegram has come!” I said. 

“Did you not hear? Oh, I had forgotten: it came in 
after you left the Station. Yes, it’s all right: Eric has got 
his commission; and, now that he has arranged matters 



438 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

with Muriel, he has business in town that must be seen to 
at once.” 

“What arrangement do you mean?” I asked with a 
sinking heart, as the thought of Arthur’s crushed hopes 
came to my mind. ‘‘Do you mean that they are engaged ?” 

‘‘They have been engaged—in a sense—for two years,” 
the old man gently replied: ‘‘that is, he has had my pro¬ 
mise to consent to it, so soon as he could secure a per¬ 
manent and settled line in life. I could never be happy 
with my child married to a man without an object to live 
for— without even an object to die for!” 

“I hope they will be happy,” a strange voice said. The 
speaker was evidently in the room, but I had not heard 
the door open, and I looked around in some astonishment. 
The Earl seemed to share my surprise. ‘‘Who spoke?” he 
exclaimed. 

‘‘It was I,” said Arthur, looking at us with a worn, 
haggard face, and eyes from which the light of life seemed 
suddenly to have faded. ‘‘And let me wish you joy also, 
dear friend,” he added, looking sadly at the Earl, and 
speaking in the same hollow tones that had startled us so 
much. 

‘‘Thank you,” the old man said, simply and heartily. 

A silence followed: then I rose, feeling sure that Arthur 
would wish to be alone, and bade our gentle host ‘‘Good 
night”: Arthur took his hand, but said nothing: nor did 
he speak again, as we went home, till we were in the 
house and had lit our bed-room candles. Then he said, 
more to himself than to me, “The heart knoweth its own 
bitterness. I never understood those words till now.” 

The next few days passed wearily enough. I felt no in¬ 
clination to call again, by myself, at the Hall; still less to 
propose that Arthur should go with me: it seemed better 
to wait till Time—that gentle healer of our bitterest sor¬ 
rows—should have helped him to recover from the first 
shock of the disappointment that had blighted his life. 

Business, however, soon demanded my presence in 
town; and I had to announce to Arthur that I must leave 



the frogs’ birthday-treat 439 

him for a while. “But I hope to run down again in a 
month/’ I added. “I would stay now, if I could. I don’t 
think it’s good for you to be alone.” 

"No, I ca’n’t face solitude, here, for long,” said Arthur. 
“But don’t think about me. I have made up my mind to 
accept a post in India, that has been offered me. Out 
there, I suppose I shall find something to live for; I ca’n’t 
see anything at present. ‘This life of mine I guard, as God’s 
high gift, from scathe and wrong, Not greatly care to lose!’ ’* 

“Yes,” I said: “your name-sake bore as heavy a blow, 
and lived through it.” 

“A far heavier one than mine,” said Arthur. “The 
woman he loved proved false. There is no such cloud as 
that on my memory of—of ” He left the name un¬ 
uttered, and went on hurriedly. “But you will return, will 
you not?” 

“Yes, I shall come back for a short time.” 

“Do,” said Arthur: “and you shall write and tell me of 
our friends. I’ll send you my address when I'm settled 
down.” 


Chapter XXIV 

The Frogs’ Birthday-Treat 

And so it came to pass that, just a week after the day 
when my Fairy-friends first appeared as Children, I found 
myself taking a farewell-stroll through the wood, in the 
hope of meeting them once more. I had but to stretch 
myself on the smooth turf, and the “eerie” feeling was on 
me in a moment. 

“Put oor ear welly low down,” said Bruno, “and I’ll tell 
oo a secret! It’s the Frogs' Birthday-Treat—and we’ve 
lost the Baby!” 

“What Baby?” I said, quite bewildered by this com¬ 
plicated piece of news. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


440 

“The Queen’s Baby, a course!” said Bruno. “Titania’s 
Baby. And we’s welly sorry. Sylvie, she’s—oh so sorry!” 

“How sorry is she?” I asked, mischievously. 

“Three-quarters of a yard,” Bruno replied with perfect 
solemnity. “And I’m a little sorry too,” he added, shut¬ 
ting his eyes so as not to see that he was smiling. 

“And what are you doing about the Baby?” 

“Well, the soldiers are all looking for it—up and down 
—everywhere.” 

“The soldier si” I exclaimed. 

“Yes, a course!” said Bruno. “When there’s no fighting 
to be done, the soldiers doos any little odd jobs, 00 know.” 

I was amused at the idea of its being a “little odd job” 
to find the Royal Baby. “But how did you come to lose 
it?” I asked. 

“We put it in a flower,” Sylvie, who had just joined us, 
explained with her eyes full of tears. “Only we ca’n’t 
remember which\” 

“She says us put it in a flower,” Bruno interrupted, 
" ’cause she doesn’t want I to get punished. But it were 
really me what put it there. Sylvie were picking Dindle- 
dums.” 

“You shouldn’t say ‘us put it in a flower’,” Sylvie very 
gravely remarked. 

“Well, hus, then,” said Bruno. “I never can remember 
those horrid H’s!” 

“Let me help you to look for it,” I said. So Sylvie and I 
made a “voyage of discovery” among all the flowers; but 
there was no Baby to be seen. 

“What’s become of Bruno?” I said, when we had com¬ 
pleted our tour. 

“He’s down in the ditch there,” said Sylvie, “amusing a 
young Frog.” 

I went down on my hands and knees to look for him, 
for I felt very curious to know how young Frogs ought to 
be amused. After a minute’s search, I found him sitting at 
the edge of the ditch, by the side of the little Frog, and 
looking rather disconsolate. 



THE FROGS’ BIRTHDAY-TREAT 44I 

“How are you getting on, Bruno?” I said, nodding to 
him as he looked up. 

“Ca’n’t amuse it no more,” Bruno answered, very dole¬ 
fully, “ ’cause it wo’n’t say what it would like to do next! 
I’ve showed it all the duck-weeds—and a live caddis- 
worm—but it wo’n’t say nuffin! What—would oo—like?” 
he shouted into the ear of the Frog: but the little creature 
sat quite still, and took no notice of him. "It’s deaf, I 
think!” Bruno said, turning away with a sigh. “And it’s 
time to get the Theatre ready.” 

"Who are the audience to be?” 

“Only but Frogs,” said Bruno. “But they haven't 
corned yet. They wants to be drove up, like sheep.” 

“Would it save time”, I suggested, “if I were to walk 
round with Sylvie, to drive up the Frogs, while you get 
the Theatre ready?” 

“That are a good plan!” cried Bruno. “But where are 
Sylvie?” 

“I’m here!” said Sylvie, peeping over the edge of the 
bank. “I was just watching two Frogs that were having a 
race.” 

“Which won it?” Bruno eagerly inquired. 

Sylvie was puzzled. “He does ask such hard questions!” 
she confided to me. 

"And what’s to happen in the Theatre?” I asked. 

"First they have their Birthday-Feast,” Sylvie said: 
“then Bruno does some Bits of Shakespeare; then he tells 
them a Story.” 

“I should think the Frogs like the Feast best. Don't 
they?” 

“Well, there’s generally very few of them that get any. 
They will keep their mouths shut so tight! And it’s just as 
well they do," she added, “because Bruno likes to cook it 
himself: and he cooks very queerly. Now they’re all in. 
Would you just help me to put them with their heads the 
right way?” 

We soon managed this part of the business, though the 
Frogs kept up a most discontented croaking all the time. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


442 

“What are they saying?” I asked Sylvie. 

"They’re saying ‘Fork! Fork!’ It’s very silly of them! 
You’re not going to have forks!” she announced with 
some severity. “Those that want any Feast have just got 
to open their mouths, and Bruno’ll put some of it in!” 

At this moment Bruno appeared, wearing a little white 
apron to show that he was a Cook, and carrying a tureen 
full of very queer-looking soup. I watched very carefully 
as he moved about among the Frogs; but I could not see 
that any of them opened their mouths to be fed—except 
one very young one, and I’m nearly sure it did it acci¬ 
dentally, in yawning. However, Bruno instantly put a 
large spoonful of soup into its mouth, and the poor little 
thing coughed violently for some time. 

So Sylvie and I had to share the soup between us, and 
to pretend to enjoy it, for it certainly was very queerly 
cooked. 

I only ventured to take one spoonful of it (“Sylvie’s 
Summer-Soup,” Bruno said it was), and must candidly 
confess that it was not at all nice; and I could not feel 
surprised that so many guests had kept their mouths shut 
up tight. 

“What’s the soup made of, Bruno?” said Sylvie, who 
had put a spoonful of it to her lips, and was making a wry 
face over it. 

And Bruno’s answer was anything but encouraging. 
“Bits of things!” 

The entertainment was to conclude with “Bits of 
Shakespeare”, as Sylvie expressed it, which were all to be 
done by Bruno, Sylvie being fully engaged in making the 
Frogs keep their heads towards the stage: after which 
Bruno was to appear in his real character, and tell them a 
Story of his own invention. 

“Will the Story have a Moral to it?” I asked Sylvie, 
while Bruno was away behind the hedge, dressing for the 
first “Bit”. 

“I think so,” Sylvie replied doubtfully. “There generally 
is a Moral, only he puts it in too soon.” 



443 


THE FROGS’ BIRTHDAY-TREAT 

“And will he say all the Bits of Shakespeare?” 

“No, he’ll only act them,” said Sylvie. “He knows 
hardly any of the words. When I see what he’s dressed 
like, I’ve to tell the Frogs what character it is. They’re 
always in such a hurry to guess! Don’t you hear them all 
saying ‘What? What?’ ” And so indeed they were: it had 
only sounded like croaking, till Sylvie explained it, but I 
could now make out the “Wawt? Wawt?” quite dis¬ 
tinctly. 

“But why do they try to guess it before they see it?” 

“I don’t know,” Sylvie said: “but they always do. 
Sometimes they begin guessing weeks and weeks before 
the day!” 

(So now, when you hear the Frogs croaking in a par¬ 
ticularly melancholy way, you may be sure they’re trying 
to guess Bruno’s next Shakespeare “Bit”. Isn’t that 
interesting?) 

However, the chorus of guessing was cut short by- 
Bruno, who suddenly rushed on from behind the scenes, 
and took a flying leap down among the Frogs, to re-arrange 
them. 

For the oldest and fattest Frog—who had never been 
properly arranged so that he could see the stage, and so 
had no idea what was going on—was getting restless, and 
had upset several of the Frogs, and turned others round 
with their heads the wrong way. And it was no good at 
all, Bruno said, to do a “Bit” of Shakespeare when there 
was nobody to look at it (you see he didn’t count me as 
anybody). So he set to work with a stick, stirring them 
up, very much as you would stir up tea in a cup, till most of 
them had at least one great stupid eye gazing at the stage. 

“Oo must come and sit among them, Sylvie,” he said in 
despair, “I’ve put these two side-by-side, with their noses 
the same way, ever so many times, but they do squarrel 
so!” 

So Sylvie took her place as “Mistress of the Cere¬ 
monies”, and Bruno vanished again behind the scenes, to 
dress for the first “Bit”. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


444 

"Hamlet!” was suddenly proclaimed, in the clear sweet 
tones I knew so well. The croaking all ceased in a moment, 
and I turned to the stage, in some curiosity to see what 
Bruno's ideas were as to the behaviour of Shakespeare’s 
greatest Character. 

According to this eminent interpreter of the Drama, 
Hamlet wore a short black cloak (which he chiefly used 
for muffling up his face, as if he suffered a good deal from 
toothache), and turned out his toes very much as he 
walked. "To be or not to be!” Hamlet remarked in a 
cheerful tone, and then turned head-over-heels several 
times, his cloak dropping off in the performance. 

I felt a little disappointed: Bruno’s conception of the 
part seemed so wanting in dignity. "Wo’n’t he say any 
more of the speech?” I whispered to Sylvie. 

"I think not,” Sylvie whispered in reply. “He generally 
turns head-over-heels when he doesn’t know any more 
words.” 

Bruno had meanwhile settled the question by disap¬ 
pearing from the stage; and the Frogs instantly began 
inquiring the name of the next Character. 

"You’ll know directly!” cried Sylvie, as she adjusted 
two or three young Frogs that had struggled round with 
their backs to the stage. “Macbeth!” she added, as Bruno 
re-appeared. 

Macbeth had something twisted round him, that went 
over one shoulder and under the other arm, and was 
meant, I believe, for a Scotch plaid. He had a thorn in his 
hand, which he held out at arm’s length, as if he were a 
little afraid of it. "Is this a dagger ?” Macbeth inquired, in 
a puzzled sort of tone: and instantly a chorus of "Thorn! 
Thorn!” arose from the Frogs (I had quite learned to 
understand their croaking by this time). 

"It’s a dagger !” Sylvie proclaimed in a peremptory 
tone. "Hold your tongues!” and the croaking ceased at 
once. 

Shakespeare has not told us, so far as I know, that Mac¬ 
beth had any such eccentric habit as turning head-over- 



the frogs’ birthday-treat 445 

heels in private life: but Bruno evidently considered it 
quite an essential part of the character, and left the stage 
in a series of somersaults. However, he was back again in 
a few moments, having tucked under his chin the end of 
a tuft of wool (probably left on the thorn by a wandering 
sheep), which made a magnificent beard, that reached 
nearly down to his feet. 

“Shylock!” Sylvie proclaimed. "No, I beg your par¬ 
don!” she hastily corrected herself, "King Lear! I hadn’t 
noticed the crown.” (Bruno had very cleverly provided 
one, which fitted him exactly, by cutting out the centre of 
a dandelion to make room for his head.) 

King Lear folded his arms (to the imminent peril of 
his beard) and said, in a mild explanatory tone, “Ay, 
every inch a king!” and then paused, as if to consider how 
this could best be proved. And here, with all possible 
deference to Bruno as a Shakespearean critic, I must 
express my opinion that the poet did not mean his three 
great tragic heroes to be so strangely alike in their per¬ 
sonal habits; nor do I believe that he would have accepted 
the faculty of turning head-over-heels as any proof at all 
of royal descent. Yet it appeared that King Lear, after 
deep meditation, could think of no other argument by 
which to prove his kingship: and, as this was the last of 
the "Bits” of Shakespeare ("We never do more than 
three,” Sylvie explained in a whisper), Bruno gave the 
audience quite a long series of somersaults before he 
finally retired, leaving the enraptured Frogs all crying out 
"More! More!” which I suppose was their way of encoring 
a performance. But Bruno wouldn’t appear again, till the 
proper time came for telling the Story. 

When he appeared at last in his real character, I 
noticed a remarkable change in his behaviour. He tried no 
more somersaults. It was clearly his opinion that, however 
suitable the habit of turning head-over-heels might be to 
such petty individuals as Hamlet and King Lear, it 
would never do for Bruno to sacrifice his dignity to such 
an extent. But it was equally clear that he did not feel 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


446 

entirely at his ease, standing all alone on the stage, with 
no costume to disguise him: and though he began, several 

times, “There were a Mouse-”, he kept glancing up 

and down, and on all sides, as if in search of more com¬ 
fortable quarters from which to tell the Story. Standing 
on one side of the stage, and partly overshadowing it, was 
a tall fox-glove, which seemed, as the evening breeze 
gently swayed it hither and thither, to offer exactly the 
sort of accommodation that the orator desired. Having 
once decided on his quarters, it needed only a second or 
two for him to run up the stem like a tiny squirrel, and to 
seat himself astride on the topmost bend, where the fairy- 
bells clustered most closely, and from whence he could 
look down on his audience from such a height that all 
shyness vanished, and he began his Story merrily. 

"Once there were a Mouse and a Crocodile and a Man 
and a Goat and a Lion.” I had never heard the "dramatis 
personae” tumbled into a story with such profusion and in 
such reckless haste; and it fairly took my breath away. 
Even Sylvie gave a little gasp, and allowed three of the 
Frogs, who seemed to be getting tired of the entertain¬ 
ment, to hop away into the ditch, without attempting to 
stop them. 

"And the Mouse found a Shoe, and it thought it were a 
Mouse-trap. So it got right in, and it stayed in ever so 
long.” 

"Why did it stay in?” said Sylvie. Her function seemed 
to be much the same as that of the Chorus in a Greek 
Play: she had to encourage the orator, and draw him out, 
by a series of intelligent questions. 

" ’Cause it thought it couldn’t get out again,” Bruno 
explained. "It were a clever mouse. It knew it couldn’t 
get out of traps!” 

"But why did it go in at all?” said Sylvie. 

"—and it jamp, and it jamp,” Bruno proceeded, ignor¬ 
ing this question, "and at last it got right out again. And 
it looked at the mark in the Shoe. And the Man’s name 
were in it. So it knew it wasn’t its own Shoe.” 



THE FROGS' BIRTHDAY-TREAT 


447 


“Had it thought it was}” said Sylvie. 

“Why, didn’t I tell oo it thought it were a Mouse-trap ?’ 
the indignant orator replied. “Please, Mister Sir, will oo 
make Sylvie attend?” Sylvie was silenced, and was all 
attention: in fact, she and I were most of the audience 
now, as the Frogs kept hopping away, and there were 
very few of them left. 

“So the Mouse gave the Man his Shoe. And the Man 
were wellv glad, ’cause he hadn’t got but one Shoe, and 
he were ho'pfiihg to get the other.” 

Here I ventured on a question. “Do you mean ‘hop¬ 
ping’, or ‘hoping’?” 

“Bofe,” said Bruno. “And the Man took the Goat out 
of the Sack.” (“We haven’t heard of the sack before,” I 
said. "Now you wo’n’t hear of it again,” said Bruno.) 
“And he said to the Goat, ‘Oo will walk about here till I 
comes back.’ And he went and he tumbled into a deep 
hole. And the Goat walked round and round. And it 
walked under the Tree. And it wug its tail. And it 
looked up in the Tree. And it sang a sad little Song. Oo 
never heard such a sad little Song!” 

“Can you sing it, Bruno?” I asked. 

"Iss, I can,” Bruno readily replied. “And I sa’n’t. It 

would make Sylvie cry-” 

“It wouldn’t!” Sylvie interrupted in great indignation. 
“And I don’t believe the Goat sang it at all!” 

“It did, though!” said Bruno. “It singed it right froo. 

I sawed it singing with its long beard-” 

“It couldn’t sing with its beard,” I said, hoping to 
puzzle the little fellow: "a beard isn’t a voice” 

“Well then, oo couldn’t walk with Sylvie!” Bruno cried 
triumphantly. “Sylvie isn’t a footl” 

I thought I had better follow Sylvie's example, and be 
silent for a while. Bruno was too sharp for us. 

“And when it had singed all the Song, it ran away— 
for to get along to look for the Man, oo know. And the 
Crocodile got along after it—for to bite it, oo know. And 
the Mouse got along after the Crocodile. 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


448 

“Wasn’t the Crocodile running?” Sylvie enquired. She 
appealed to me. “Crocodiles do run, don’t they?” 

I suggested “crawling” as the proper word. 

“He wasn’t running,” said Bruno, “and he wasn’t 
crawling. He went struggling along like a portmanteau. 
And he held his chin ever so high in the air-” 

“What did he do that for?” said Sylvie. 

“ ’Cause he hadn’t got a toofache!” said Bruno. “Ca’n’t 
00 make out nuffin wizout I 'splain it? Why, if he’d had 
a toofache, a course he’d have held his head down—like 
this—and he’d have put a lot of warm blankets round 
it!” 

“If he’d had any blankets,” Sylvie argued. 

“Course he had blankets!” retorted her brother. “Doos 
00 think Crocodiles goes walks wizout blankets? And he 
frowned with his eyebrows. And the Goat was welly 
flightened at his eyebrows!” 

“I’d never be afraid of eyebrows !” exclaimed Sylvie. 

“I should think 00 would, though, if they’d got a 
Crocodile fastened to them, like these had! And so the 
Man jamp, and he jamp, and at last he got right out of 
the hole.” 

Sylvia gave another little gasp: this rapid dodging 
about among the characters of the Story had taken away 
her breath. 

“And he runned away—for to look for the Goat, 00 
know. And he heard the Lion grunting-” 

“Lions don’t grunt,” said Sylvie. 

“This one did,” said Bruno. “And its mouth were like a 
large cupboard. And it had plenty of room in its mouth. 
And the Lion runned after the Man—for to eat him, 00 
know. And the Mouse runned after the Lion.” 

“But the Mouse was running after the Crocodile,” I 
said: “he couldn’t run after both\” 

Bruno sighed over the density of his audience, but ex¬ 
plained very patiently. “He did runned after bofe\ ’cause 
they went the same way! And first he caught the Croco¬ 
dile, and then he didn’t catch the Lion. And when he’d 



THE FROGS’ BIRTHDAY-TREAT 449 

caught the Crocodile, what doos oo think he did—’cause 
he’d got pincers in his pocket?” 

“I ca’n’t guess,” said Sylvie. 

“Nobody couldn’t guess it!” Bruno cried in high glee. 
“Why, he wrenched out that Crocodile’s toof!” 

“Which tooth?” I ventured to ask. 

But Bruno was not to be puzzled. “The toof he were 
going to bite the Goat with, a course!” 

“He couldn’t be sure about that”, I argued, “unless he 
wrenched out all its teeth.” 

Bruno laughed merrily, and half sang, as he swung 
himself backwards and forwards, “He did—wrenched— 
out —all its teef!” 

“Why did the Crocodile wait to have them wrenched 
out?” said Sylvie. 

“It had to wait,” said Bruno. 

I ventured on another question. “But what became, of 
the Man who said ‘You may wait here till I come back’?” 

“He didn’t say ‘Oo may’,” Bruno explained. “He said, 
‘Oo will.’ Just like Sylvie says to me ‘Oo will do oor les¬ 
sons till twelve o’clock.’ Oh, I wiss,” he added with a little 
sigh, “I wiss Sylvie would say ‘Oo may do oor lessons’!” 

This was a dangerous subject for discussion, Sylvie 
seemed to think. She returned to the Story. “But what 
became of the Man?” 

“Well, the Lion springed at him. But it came so slow, it 
were three weeks in the air-” 

“Did the Man wait for it all that time?” I said. 

“Course he didn’t!” Bruno replied, gliding head-first 
down the stem of the fox-glove, for the Story was evi¬ 
dently close to its end. “He sold his house, and he packed 
up his things, while the Lion were coming. And he went 
and he lived in another town. So the Lion ate the wrong 
man.” 

This was evidently the Moral: so Sylvie made her final 
proclamation to the Frogs. “The Story’s finished! And 
whatever is to be learned from it,” she added, aside to me, 
“I’m sure I don’t know!” 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


450 

I did not feel quite clear about it myself, so made no 
suggestion: but the Frogs seemed quite content, Moral or 
no Moral, and merely raised a husky chorus of “Off! 
Off!” as they hopped away. 


Chapter XXV 
Looking Eastward 

“It’s just a week”, I said, three days later, to Arthur, 
‘‘since we heard of Lady Muriel’s engagement. I think / 
ought to call, at any rate, and offer my congratulations. 
Wo’n’t you come with me?” 

A pained expression passed over his face. “When must 
you leave us?” he asked. 

“By the first train on Monday.” 

“Well—yes, I will come with you. It would seem 
strange and unfriendly if I didn’t. But this is only Friday. 
Give me till Sunday afternoon. I shall be stronger then.” 

Shading his eyes with one hand, as if half-ashamed of 
the tears that were coursing down his cheeks, he held 
the other out to me. It trembled as I clasped it. 

I tried to frame some words of sympathy; but they 
seemed poor and cold, and I left them unspoken. “Good 
night!” was all I said. 

“Good night, dear friend!” he replied. There was a 
manly vigour in his tone that convinced me he was 
wrestling with, and triumphing over, the great sorrow 
that had so nearly wrecked his life—and that, on the 
stepping-stone of his dead self, he would surely rise to 
higher things! 

There was no chance, I was glad to think, as we set out 
on Sunday afternoon, of meeting Eric at the Hall, as he 
had returned to town the day after his engagement was 
announced. His presence might have disturbed the calm 
—the almost unnatural calm—with which Arthur met 



LOOKING EASTWARD 


451 

the woman who had won his heart, and murmured the 
few graceful words of sympathy that the occasion de¬ 
manded. 

Lady Muriel was perfectly radiant with happiness: 
sadness could not live in the light of such a smile: and 
even Arthur brightened under it, and, when she remarked 
“You see I'm watering my flowers, though it is the Sab¬ 
bath-Day,” his voice had almost its old ring of cheerful¬ 
ness as he replied “Even on the Sabbath-Day works of 
mercy are allowed. But this isn’t the Sabbath-Day. The 
Sabbath-Day has ceased to exist.” 

“I know it’s not Saturday,” Lady Muriel replied: “but 
isn't Sunday often called ‘the Christian Sabbath' ?” 

“It is so called, I think, in recognition of the spirit of 
the Jewish institution, that one day in seven should be a 
day of rest. But I hold that Christians are freed from the 
literal observance of the Fourth Commandment.” 

“Then where is our authority for Sunday observance ?' ’ 

"We have, first, the fact that the seventh day was 
‘sanctified’, when God rested from the work of Creation. 
That is binding on us as Theists. Secondly, we have the 
fact that ‘the Lord’s Day’ is a Christian institution. That 
is binding on us as Christians.” 

“And your practical rules would be-?” 

“First, as Theists, to keep it holy in some special way, 
and to make it, so far as is reasonably possible, a day of 
rest. Secondly, as Christians, to attend public worship.” 

"And what of amusements ?” 

“I would say of them, as of all kinds of work, whatever 
is innocent on a week-day, is innocent on Sunday, 
provided it does not interfere with the duties of the 
day.” 

“Then you would allow children to play on Sunday?” 

"Certainly I should. Why make the day irksome to 
their restless natures?” 

“I have a letter somewhere,” said Lady Muriel, “from 
an old friend, describing the way in which Sunday was 
kept in her younger days. I will fetch it for you.” 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


452 

“I had a similar description, viva voce, years ago,” Ar¬ 
thur said when she had left us, “from a little girl. It was 
really touching to hear the melancholy tone in which she 
said ‘On Sunday I mustn’t play with my doll! On Sunday 
I mustn’t run on the sands! On Sunday I mustn’t dig in 
the garden!’ Poor child! She had indeed abundant cause 
for hating Sunday!” 

“Here is the letter,” said Lady Muriel, returning. “Let 
me read you a piece of it. ” 

“When, as a child, I first opened my eyes on a Sunday- 
morning, a feeling of dismal anticipation, which began at least 
on the Friday, culminated. I knew what was before me, and my 
wish, if not my word, was 'Would God it were evening!’ It was 
no day of rest, but a day of texts, of catechisms [Watts’), of tracts 
about converted swearers, godly char-women, and edifying 
deaths of sinners saved. 

“Up with the lark, hymns and portions of Scripture had to 
be learned by heart till 8 o’clock, when there were family- 
prayers, then breakfast, which I was never able to enjoy, partly 
from the fast already undergone, and partly from the outlook 
I dreaded. 

“At 9 came Sunday-School; and it made me indignant to be 
put into the class with the village-children, as well as alarmed 
lest, by some mistake of mine, I should be put below them. 

“The Church-Service was a veritable Wilderness of Zin. 
I wandered in it, pitching the tabernacle of my thoughts on the 
lining of the square family-pew, the fidgets of my small brothers, 
and the horror of knowing that, on the Monday, I should have 
to write out, from memory, jottings of the rambling disconnected 
extempore sermon, which might have any text but its own, and 
to stand or fall by the result. 

“This was followed by a cold dinner at 1 (servants to have no 
work), Sunday-School again from 2 to 4, and Evening-Service 
at 6. The intervals were perhaps the greatest trial of all, from 
the efforts I had to make, to be less than usually sinful, by read¬ 
ing books and sermons as barren as the Dead Sea. There was 
but one rosy spot, in the distance, all that day: and that was 
‘bed-time’, which never could come too early!” 

"Such teaching was well meant, no doubt,” said Ar- 



LOOKING EASTWARD 453 

thur; "but it must have driven many of its victims into 
deserting the Church-Services altogether.” 

"I’m afraid / was a deserter this morning,” she gravely 
said. "I had to write to Eric. Would you—would you 
mind my telling you something he said about prayer ? It 
had never struck me in that light before.” 

"In what light?” said Arthur. 

"Why, that all Nature goes by fixed, regular laws— 
Science has proved that. So that asking God to do any¬ 
thing (except of course praying for spiritual blessings) is 
to expect a miracle: and we've no right to do that. I’ve 
not put it as well as he did: but that was the outcome of 
it, and it has confused me. Please tell me what you can 
say in answer to it.” 

"I don’t propose to discuss Captain Lindon’s diffi¬ 
culties,” Arthur gravely replied; "specially as he is not 
present. But, if it is your difficulty,” (his voice uncon¬ 
sciously took a tender tone) "then I will speak.” 

“It is my difficulty,” she said anxiously. 

“Then I will begin by asking ‘Why did you except 
spiritual blessings?’ Is not your mind a part of Nature?” 

“Yes, but Free-Will comes in there—I can choose this 
or that; and God can influence my choice.” 

"Then you are not a Fatalist?” 

"Oh, no!” she earnestly exclaimed. 

"Thank God!” Arthur said to himself, but in so low 
a whisper that only I heard it. "You grant then that I 
can, by an act of free choice, move this cup”, suiting; the 
action to the word, “this way or that way?” 

"Yes, I grant it.” 

"Well, let us see how far the result is produced by 
fixed laws. The cup moves because certain mechanical 
forces are impressed on it by my hand. My hand moves 
because certain forces—electric, magnetic, or whatever 
‘nerve-force’ may prove to be—are impressed on it by 
my brain. This nerve-force, stored in the brain, would 
probably be traceable, if Science were complete, to chemi¬ 
cal forces supplied to the brain by the blood, and ulti- 



SYLVIE AND BRUNO 


454 

mately derived from the food I eat and the air I breathe.” 

“But would not that be Fatalism? Where would Free- 
Will come in?” 

“In choice of nerves,” replied Arthur. “The nerve-force 
in the brain may flow just as naturally down one nerve 
as down another. We need something more than a fixed 
Law of Nature to settle which nerve shall carry it. That 
‘something’ is Free-Will.” 

Her eyes sparkled. "I see what you mean!” she ex¬ 
claimed. "Human Free-Will is an exception to the system 
of fixed Law. Eric said something like that. And then I 
think he pointed out that God can only influence Nature 
by influencing Human Wills. So that we might reason¬ 
ably pray 'give us this day our daily bread’, because many 
of the causes that produce bread are under Man’s control. 
But to pray for rain, or fine weather, would be as un¬ 
reasonable as-” she checked herself, as if fearful of 

saying something irreverent. 

In a hushed, low tone, that trembled with emotion, 
and with the solemnity of one in the presence of death, 
Arthur slowly replied "Shall he that contendeth with the 
Almighty instruct him? Shall we, ‘the swarm that in the 
noon-tide beam were born,’ feeling in ourselves the power 
to direct, this way or that, the forces of Nature—of 
Nature, of which we form so trivial a part—shall we, in 
our boundless arrogance, in our pitiful conceit, deny that 
power to the Ancient of Days? Saying, to our Creator, 
‘Thus far and no further. Thou madest, but thou canst 
not rule!’?” 

Lady Muriel had covered her face in her hands, and 
did not look up. She only murmured "Thanks, thanks!” 
again and again. 

We rose to go. Arthur said, with evident effort, "One 
word more. If you would know the power of Prayer—in 
anything and everything that Man can need— try it. Ask , 
and it shall be given you. I —have tried it. I know that God 
answers prayer!” 

Our walk home was a silent one, till we had nearly 



LOOKING EASTWARD 


455 

reached the lodgings: then Arthur murmured—and it 
was almost an echo of my own thoughts—“ What knowest 
thou, 0 wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband?” 

The subject was not touched on again. We sat on, 
talking, while hour after hour, of this our last night to¬ 
gether, glided away unnoticed. He had much to tell me 
about India, and the new life he was going to, and the 
work he hoped to do. And his great generous soul seemed 
so filled with noble ambition as to have no space left for 
any vain regret or selfish repining. 

“Come, it is nearly morning!” Arthur said at last, rising 
and leading the way upstairs. “The sun will be rising 
in a few minutes: and, though I have basely defrauded 
you of your last chance of a night’s rest here. I’m sure 
you’ll forgive me: for I really couldn’t bring myself to say 
‘Good night’ sooner. And God knows whether you’ll ever 
see me again, or hear of me!” 

“Hear of you I am certain I shall!” I warmly responded, 
and quoted the concluding lines of that strange poem 
“Waring”: 

‘‘Oh, never star 
Was lost here, but it rose afar! 

Look East, where whole new thousands are! 

In Vishnu-land what Avatar?” 

“Aye, look Eastward!” Arthur eagerly replied, pausing 
at the stair-case window, which commanded a fine view 
of the sea and the eastward horizon. “The West is the 
fitting tomb for all the sorrow and the sighing, all the 
errors and the follies of the Past: for all its withered 
Hopes and all its buried Loves! From the East comes new 
strength, new ambition, new Hope, new Life, new Love! 
Look Eastward! Aye, look Eastward!” 

His last words were still ringing in my ears as I en¬ 
tered my room, and undrew the window-curtains, just 
in time to see the sun burst in glory from his ocean- 
prison, and clothe the world in the light of a new day. 

“So may it be for him, and me, and all of us!” I mused. 



456 SYLVIE AND BRUNO 

“All that is evil, and dead, and hopeless, fading with the 
Night that is past! All that is good, and living, and hope¬ 
ful, rising with the dawn of Day! 

“Fading, with the Night, the chilly mists, and the 
noxious vapours, and the heavy shadows, and the wailing 
gusts, and the owl’s melancholy hootings: rising, with 
the Day, the darting shafts of light, and the wholesome 
morning breeze, and the warmth of a dawning life, and 
the mad music of the lark! Look Eastward! 

“Fading, with the Night, the clouds of ignorance, and 
the deadly blight of sin, and the silent tears of sorrow: 
and ever rising, higher, higher, with the Day, the radiant 
dawn of knowledge, and the sweet breath of purity, and 
the throb of a world’s ecstasy! Look Eastward! 

“Fading, with the Night, the memory of a dead love, 
and the withered leaves of a blighted hope, and the sickly 
repinings and moody regrets that numb the best energies 
of the soul: and rising, broadening, rolling upward like 
a living flood, the manly resolve, and the dauntless will, 
and the heavenward gaze of faith —the substance of things 
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen! 

“Look Eastward! Aye, look Eastward!” 



IV 

Sylvie and Bruno 
Concluded 







Dreams, that elude the Maker’s frenzied grasp — 
Hands, stark and still, on a dead Mother’s breast, 
Which nevermore shall render clasp for clasp, 

Or deftly soothe a weeping Child to rest — 

In suchlike forms me listeth to portray 
My Tale, here ended. Thou delicious Fay — 

The guardian of a Sprite that lives to tease thee — 
Loving in earnest, chiding but in play 
The merry mocking Bruno! Who, that sees thee. 
Can fail to love thee, Darling, even as IP — 

My sweetest Sylvie we must say “Good-byet” 




PREFACE 


Let me here express my sincere gratitude to the many 
Reviewers who have noticed, whether favourably or un¬ 
favourably, the previous Volume. Their unfavourable re¬ 
marks were, most probably, well-deserved; the favourable 
ones less probably so. Both kinds have no doubt served 
to make the book known, and have helped the reading 
Public to form their opinions of it. Let me also here assure 
them that it is not from any want of respect for their 
criticisms, that I have carefully forborne from reading 
any of them. I am strongly of opinion that an author had 
far better not read any reviews of his books: the unfavour¬ 
able ones are almost certain to make him cross, and the 
0 


favourable ones conceited; and neither of these results is 
desirable. 

Criticisms have, however, reached me from private 
sources, to some of which I propose to offer a reply. 

One such critic complains that Arthur’s strictures, on 
sermons and on choristers, are too severe. Let me say, in 
reply, that I do not hold myself responsible for any of the 
opinions expressed by the characters in my book. They 
are simply opinions which, it seemed to me, might prob¬ 
ably be held by the persons into whose mouths I put 
them, and which were worth consideration. 

Other critics have objected to certain innovations in 
spelling, such as “ca’n’t”, “wo’n’t”, “traveler”. In reply, 
I can only plead my firm conviction that the popular 
usage is wrong. As to “ca’n’t”, it will not be disputed 
that, in all other words ending in “n’t”, these letters are 
an abbreviation of “not”; and it is surely absurd to sup¬ 
pose that, in this solitary instance, “not” is represented 
by “’t”! In fact “can’t” is the proper abbreviation for 
“can it”, just as “is't” is for “is it”. Again, in “wo’n’t”, 
the first apostrophe is needed, because the word “would” 


461 



462 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

is here abridged into “wo”: but I hold it proper to spell 
“don’t” with only one apostrophe, because the word “do” 
is here complete. As to such words as “traveler”, I hold 
the correct principle to be, to double the consonant when 
the accent falls on that syllable; otherwise to leave it 
single. This rule is observed in most cases (e.g. we double 
the “r” in “preferred”, but leave it single in “offered”), 
so that I am only extending, to other cases, an existing 
rule. I admit, however, that I do not spell “parallel”, as 
the rule would have it; but here we are constrained, by 
the etymology, to insert the double “1”. 

In the Preface to Vol. I. were two puzzles, on which 
my readers might exercise their ingenuity. One was, to 
detect the 3 lines of “padding”, which I had found it 
necessary to supply in the passage extending from the 
top of p. 280 to the middle of p. 282. They are the 23rd, 
24th and 25th lines of p. 281. The other puzzle was, to de¬ 
termine which (if any) of the 8 stanzas of the Gardener’s 
Song (see pp. 294, 301, 303, 306, 314, 318, 342, 344) were 
adapted to the context, and which (if any) had the con¬ 
text adapted to them. The last of them is the only one that 
was adapted to the context, the “Garden-Door that 
opened with a key” having been substituted for some 
creature (a Cormorant, I think) “that nestled in a tree”. 
At pp. 301, 314, and 342, the context was adapted to the 
stanza. At p. 306, neither stanza nor context was altered: 
the connection between them was simply a piece of good 
luck. 

In the Preface to Vol. I., at pp. 255, 256 ,1 gave an ac¬ 
count of the making-up of the story of “Sylvie and 
Bruno”. A few more details may perhaps be acceptable 
to my Readers. 

It was in 1873, as I now believe, that the idea first oc¬ 
curred to me that a little fairy-tale (written, in 1867, for 
“Aunt Judy’s Magazine”, under the title “Bruno’s Re¬ 
venge”) might serve as the nucleus of a longer story. This 
I surmise, from having found the original draft of the 



PREFACE 


463 

last paragraph of Vol. II., dated 1873. So that this para¬ 
graph has been waiting 20 years for its chance of emerging 
into print—more than twice the period so cautiously 
recommended by Horace for “repressing” one’s literary 
efforts! 

It was in February, 1885, that I entered into negotia¬ 
tions, with Mr. Harry Furniss, for illustrating the book. 
Most of the substance of both Volumes was then in exis¬ 
tence in manuscript: and my original intention was to 
publish the whole story at once. In September, 1885, I 
received from Mr. Furniss the first set of drawings—the 
four which illustrate “Peter and Paul”: in November, 
1886,1 received the second set—the three which illustrate 
the Professor’s song about the “little man” who had “a 
little gun”: and in January, 1887 ,1 received the third set 
—the four which illustrate the “Pig-Tale”. 

So we went on, illustrating first one bit of the story, 
and then another, without any idea of sequence. And it 
was not till March, 1889, that, having calculated the num¬ 
ber of pages the story would occupy, I decided on divid¬ 
ing it into two portions, and publishing it half at a time. 
This necessitated the writing of a sort of conclusion for 
the first Volume: and most of my Readers, I fancy, re¬ 
garded this as the actual conclusion, when that Volume 
appeared in December, 1889. At any rate, among all the 
letters I received about it, there was only one which ex¬ 
pressed any suspicion that it was not a final conclusion. 
This letter was from a child. She wrote "we were so glad, 
when we came to the end of the book, to find that there 
was no ending-up, for that shows us that you are going 
to write a sequel.” 

It may interest some of my Readers to know the theory 
on which this story is constructed. It is an attempt to 
show what might possibly happen, supposing that Fairies 
really existed; and that they were sometimes visible to 
us, and we to them; and that they were sometimes able 
to assume human form: and supposing, also, that human 
beings might sometimes become conscious of what goes 



464 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

on in the Fairy-world—by actual transference of their 
immaterial essence, such as we meet with in “Esoteric 
Buddhism". 

I have supposed a Human being to be capable of vari¬ 
ous psychical states, with varying degrees of conscious¬ 
ness, as follows: 

(а) the ordinary state, with no consciousness of the 
presence of Fairies; 

(б) the “eerie” state, in which, while conscious of ac¬ 
tual surroundings, he is also conscious of the presence of 
Fairies; 

(c) a form of trance, in which, while wwconscious of 
actual surroundings, and apparently asleep, he (i.e. his 
immaterial essence) migrates to other scenes, in the actual 
world, or in Fairyland, and is conscious of the presence 
of Fairies. 

I have also supposed a Fairy to be capable of migrating 
from Fairyland into the actual world, and of assuming, 
at pleasure, a Human form; and also to be capable of 
various psychical states, viz. 

(a) the ordinary state, with no consciousness of the 
presence of Human beings; 

(b) a sort of “eerie" state, in which he is conscious, if in 
the actual world, of the presence of actual Human beings; 
if in Fairyland, of the presence of the immaterial essences 
of Human beings. 

I will here tabulate the passages, in both Volumes, 
where abnormal states occur. 


Vol. I. 

Historian’s Locality and 

State. 

Other Characters. 

pp.264-270 

In train .. 

c 

Chancellor ( b) p. 264, 

277-289 

do.. 

c 

294-301 

do. 

c 


303-310 

At lodgings. 

c 


314-318 

On beach .. 

c 


319-350 

At lodgings. 

c 

S. and B. ( b ) pp. 338- 
341 - 

Professor (b) p. 344. 

355-370 

In wood . 

b 

Bruno ( b) pp. 358- 
370 . 

















PREFACE 


465 


Vol. I. 

Historian’s Locality and 

State. 

Other characters. 

PP- 372-376 

In wood, sleep-walking 

c 

S. and B. ( b ). 

383-385 

Among ruins . 

c 

do. (b). 

389. 390 

do. dreaming 

a 


391-393 

do. sleep- 

c 

S. B. and Professor in 


walking 


Human form. 

393 

In street... 

b 


398-406 

At station, &c. 

b 

S. and B. ( b) 

410-421 

In garden. 

c 

S. B. and Professor (b) 

423-431 

On road, &c. 

a 

S. and B. in Human 




form. 

431-437 

In street, &c.. 

a 


439-450 

In wood . 

b 

S. and B. ( b ). 

Vol. II. 




pp.474-482 

In garden. 

b 

S. and B. (b). 

496-498 

On road. 

b 

do. (h). 

498 - 5 1 1 

do. 

b 

do. in Human 




form. 

5 H- 5 I 7 

do. 

b 

do. (6). 

547-578 

In drawing-room ... 

a 

do. in Human 




form. 

578-595 

do. 

c 

do. ( b ). 

603-607 

In smoking-room ... 

c 

do. (6). 

623-626 

In wood . 

b 

do. (a); Lady 




Muriel (b). 

627-644 

At lodgings. 

c 


646-669 

do. . 

c 


673-end. 

do. . 

b 



In the Preface to Vol. I., at pp. 255 and 256 ,1 gave an 
account of the origination of some of the ideas embodied 
in the book. A few more such details may perhaps interest 
my Readers: 

I. p. 361. The very peculiar use, here made of a dead 
mouse, comes from real life. I once found two very small 
boys, in a garden, playing a microscopic game of "Single- 
Wicket”. The bat was, I think, about the size of a table¬ 
spoon; and the utmost distance attained by the ball, in 
its most daring flights, was some 4 or 5 yards. The exact 
length was of course a matter of supreme importance; 
and it was always carefully measured out (the batsman 
and the bowler amicably sharing the toil) with a dead 
mouse! 

I. p. 388 The two quasi-mathematical Axioms, quoted 

Q l.c. 

























466 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

by Arthur at p. 388 of Vol. I. (“Things that are greater 
than the same are greater than one another”, and “All 
angles are equal”) were actually enunciated, in all seri¬ 
ousness, by undergraduates at a University situated not 
100 miles from Ely. 

II. p. 477. Bruno’s remark (“I can, if I like, &c.”) was 
actually made by a little boy. 

II. p. 478. So also was his remark (“I know what it 
doesn’t spell”). And his remark (“I just twiddled my 
eyes, &c.”) I heard from the lips of a little girl, who had 
just solved a puzzle I had set her. 

II. p. 501. Bruno’s soliloquy (“For its father, &c.”) was 
actually spoken by a little girl, looking out of the window 
of a railway-carriage. 

II. p. 540. The remark, made by a guest at the dinner¬ 
party, when asking for a dish of fruit (“I’ve been wishing 
for them, &c.”) I heard made by the great Poet-Laureate, 
whose loss the whole reading-world has so lately had to 
deplore. 

II. p. 553. Bruno’s speech, on the subject of the age of 
“Mein Herr”, embodies the reply of a little girl to the 
question “Is your grandmother an old lady?” “I don’t 
know if she’s an old lady,” said this cautious young per¬ 
son; “she’s eighty-three.” 

II. p. 573. The speech about “Obstruction” is no mere 
creature of my imagination! It is copied verbatim from 
the columns of the Standard, and was spoken by Sir 
William Harcourt, who was, at the time, a member of 
the “Opposition”, at the “National Liberal Club”, on 
July the 16th, 1890. 

II. p. 636. The Professor’s remark, about a dog’s tail, 
that “it doesn’t bite at that end”, was actually made by a 
child, when warned of the danger he was incurring by 
pulling the dog’s tail. 

II. p. 657. The dialogue between Sylvie and Bruno, 
which occupies lines 28 to 36, is a verbatim report (merely 
substituting “cake” for “penny”) of a dialogue overheard 
between two children. 



PREFACE 


467 

One story in this Volume—“Bruno’s Picnic”—I can 
vouch for as suitable for telling to children, having tested 
it again and again; and, whether my audience has been 
a dozen little girls in a village-school, or some thirty or 
forty in a London drawing-room, or a hundred in a High 
School, I have always found them earnestly attentive, 
and keenly appreciative of such fun as the story sup¬ 
plied. 

May I take this opportunity of calling attention to 
what I flatter myself was a successful piece of name-coin¬ 
ing, at p. 283 of Vol. I. Does not the name “Sibimet” 
fairly embody the character of the Sub-Warden? The 
gentle Reader has no doubt observed what a singularly 
useless article in a house a brazen trumpet is, if you 
simply leave it lying about, and never blow it! 

Readers of the first Volume, who have amused them¬ 
selves by trying to solve the two puzzles propounded at 
page 257 of the Preface, may perhaps like to exercise 
their ingenuity in discovering which (if any) of the fol¬ 
lowing parallelisms were intentional, and which (if any) 
accidental. 

“Little Birds”. Events, and Persons. 

Stanza 1. Banquet. 

2. Chancellor. 

3. Empress and Spinach (II. 635). 

4. Warden’s Return. 

5. Professor’s Lecture (II. 640). 

6. Other Professor’s Song (I. 329). 

7. Petting of Uggug. 

8. Baron Doppelgeist. 

9. Jester and Bear (I. 321). Little Foxes. 

10. Bruno’s Dinner-Bell; Little Foxes. 

I will publish the answer to this puzzle in the Preface 
to a little book of “Original Games and Puzzles”, now 
in course of preparation. 

I have reserved, for the last, one or two rather more 
serious topics. 



468 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

I had intended, in this Preface, to discuss more fully, 
than I had done in the previous Volume, the “Morality 
of Sport”, with special reference to letters I have received 
from lovers of Sport, in which they point out the many 
great advantages which men get from it, and try to prove 
that the suffering, which it inflicts on animals, is too 
trivial to be regarded. 

But, when I came to think the subject out, and to ar¬ 
range the whole of the arguments “pro” and “con”, I 
found it much too large for treatment here. Some day, 
I hope to publish an essay on this subject. At present, I 
will content myself with stating the net result I have 
arrived at. 

It is, that God has given to Man an absolute right to 
take the lives of other animals, for any reasonable cause, 
such as the supply of food: but that He has not given to 
Man the right to inflict pain, unless when necessary, that 
mere pleasure, or advantage, does not constitute such a 
necessity: and, consequently, that pain, inflicted for the 
purposes of Sport, is cruel, and therefore wrong. But I find 
it a far more complex question than I had supposed; and 
that the “case”, on the side of the Sportsman, is a much 
stronger one than I had supposed. So, for the present, I 
say no more about it. 

Objections have been raised to the severe language I 
have put into the mouth of “Arthur”, at p. 397, on the 
subject of “Sermons”, and at pp. 395, 396, on the subjects 
of Choral Services and “Choristers”. 

I have already protested against the assumption that I 
am ready to endorse the opinions of characters in my 
story. But, in these two instances, I admit that I am much 
in sympathy with “Arthur”. In my opinion, far too many 
sermons are expected from our preachers; and, as a con¬ 
sequence, a great many are preached, which are not worth 
listening to; and, as a consequence of that, we are very 
apt not to listen. The reader of this paragraph probably 
heard a sermon last Sunday morning? Well, let him, if 



PREFACE 469 

he can, name the text, and state how the preacher treated 
it! 

Then, as to “Choristers”, and all the other accessories 
—of music, vestments, processions, &c.—which have 
come, along with them, into fashion—while freely ad¬ 
mitting that the “Ritual” movement was sorely needed, 
and that it has effected a vast improvement in our Church- 
Services, which had become dead and dry to the last 
degree, I hold that, like many other desirable movements, 
it has gone too far in the opposite direction, and has in¬ 
troduced many new dangers. 

For the Congregation this new movement involves the 
danger of learning to think that the Services are done for 
them; and that their bodily presence is all they need con¬ 
tribute. And, for Clergy and Congregation alike, it in¬ 
volves the danger of regarding these elaborate Services as 
ends in themselves, and of forgetting that they are simply 
means, and the very hollo west of mockeries, unless they 
bear fruit in our lives. 

For the Choristers it seems to involve the danger of self- 
conceit, as described at p. 395 (N.B. “stagy-entrances” is 
a misprint for “stage-entrances”), the danger of regarding 
those parts of the Service, where their help is not re¬ 
quired, as not worth attending to, the danger of coming 
to regard the Service as a mere outward form—a series 
of postures to be assumed, and of words to be said or sung, 
while the thoughts are elsewhere—and the danger of 
"familiarity” breeding “contempt” for sacred things. 

Let me illustrate these last two forms of danger, from 
my own experience. Not long ago, I attended a Cathedral- 
Service, and was placed immediately behind a row of 
men, members of the Choir; and I could not help noticing 
that they treated the Lessons as a part of the Service to 
which they needed not to give any attention, and as affor¬ 
ding them a convenient opportunity for arranging music- 
books, &c., &c. Also I have frequently seen a row of little 
choristers, after marching in procession to their places, 
kneel down, as if about to pray, and rise from their knees 



470 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

after a minute spent in looking about them, it being but 
too evident that the attitude was a mere mockery. Surely 
it is very dangerous, for these children, to thus accustom 
them to pretend to pray? As an instance of irreverent 
treatment of holy things, I will mention a custom, which 
no doubt many of my readers have noticed in Churches 
where the Clergy and Choir enter in procession, viz. that, 
at the end of the private devotions, which are carried on 
in the vestry, and which are of course inaudible to the 
Congregation, the final “Amen” is shouted, loud enough 
to be heard all through the Church. This serves as a signal, 
to the Congregation, to prepare to rise when the pro¬ 
cession appears: and it admits of no dispute that it is for 
this purpose that it is thus shouted. When we remember 
to Whom that “Amen” is really addressed, and consider 
that it is here used for the same purpose as one of the 
Church-bells, we must surely admit that it is a piece of 
gross irreverence? To me it is much as if I were to see a 
Bible used as a footstool. 

As an instance of the dangers, for the Clergy them¬ 
selves, introduced by this new movement, let me mention 
the fact that, according to my experience, Clergymen of 
this school are specially apt to retail comic anecdotes, in 
which the most sacred names and words—sometimes ac¬ 
tual texts from the Bible—are used as themes for jesting. 
Many such things are repeated as having been originally 
said by children, whose utter ignorance of evil must no 
doubt acquit them, in the sight of God, of all blame; but 
it must be otherwise for those who consciously use such 
innocent utterances as material for their unholy mirth. 

Let me add, however, most earnestly, that I fully be¬ 
lieve that this profanity is, in many cases, tmconscious: the 
“environment” (as I have tried to explain at pp. 532, 533) 
makes all the difference between man and man; and I 
rejoice to think that many of these profane stories— 
which I find so painful to listen to, and should feel it a sin 
to repeat—give to their ears no pain, and to their con¬ 
sciences no shock; and that they can utter, not less sin- 



PREFACE 


471 

cerely than myself, the two prayers, “ Hallowed be Thy 
Name,” and “ from hardness of heart, and contempt of Thy 
Word and Commandment, Good Lord, deliver us!” To 
which I would desire to add, for their sake and for my own, 
Keble’s beautiful petition, '‘help us, this and every day, 
To live more nearly as we pray!” It is, in fact, for its conse¬ 
quences —for the grave dangers, both to speaker and to 
hearer, which it involves—rather than for what it is in 
itself, that I mourn over this clerical habit of profanity in 
social talk. To the believing hearer it brings the danger of 
loss of reverence for holy things, by the mere act of listen¬ 
ing to, and enjoying, such jests; and also the temptation 
to retail them for the amusement of others. To the un¬ 
believing hearer it brings a welcome confirmation of his 
theory that religion is a fable, in the spectacle of its ac¬ 
credited champions thus betraying their trust. And to 
the speaker himself it must surely bring the danger of loss 
of faith. For surely such jests, if uttered with no conscious¬ 
ness of harm, must necessarily be also uttered with no 
consciousness, at the moment, of the reality of God, as a 
living being, who hears all we say. And he, who allows 
himself the habit of thus uttering holy words, with no 
thought of their meaning, is but too likely to find that, for 
him, God has become a myth, and heaven a poetic fancy 
—that, for him, the light of life is gone, and that he is at 
heart an atheist, lost in “ a darkness that may be felt”. 

There is, I fear, at the present time, an increasing ten¬ 
dency to irreverent treatment of the name of God and of 
subjects connected with religion. Some of our theatres are 
helping this downward movement by the gross carica¬ 
tures of clergymen which they put upon the stage: some 
of our clergy are themselves helping it, by showing that 
they can lay aside the spirit of reverence, along with their 
surplices, and can treat as jests, when outside their 
churches, names and things to which they pay an almost 
superstitious veneration when inside : the “Salvation 
Army” has, I fear, with the best intentions, done much 
to help it, by the coarse familiarity with which they treat 



472 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

holy things: and surely every one, who desires to live in 
the spirit of the prayer “Hallowed be Thy Name ”, ought 
to do what he can, however little that may be, to check 
it. So I have gladly taken this unique opportunity, how¬ 
ever unfit the topic may seem for the Preface to a book 
of this kind, to express some thoughts which have 
weighed on my mind for a long time. I did not expect, 
when I wrote the Preface to Vol. I, that it would be read 
to any appreciable extent: but I rejoice to believe, from 
evidence that has reached me, that it has been read by 
many, and to hope that this Preface will also be so: and I 
think that, among them, some will be found ready to 
sympathize with the views I have put forwards, and 
ready to help, with their prayers and their example, the 
revival, in Society, of the waning spirit of reverence. 

Christmas, 1893. 



Chapter I 


Bruno’s Lessons 

During the next month or two my solitary town-life 
seemed, by contrast, unusually dull and tedious. I missed 
the pleasant friends I had left behind at Elveston—the 
genial interchange of thought—the sympathy which gave 
to one’s ideas a new and vivid reality: but, perhaps more 
than all, I missed the companionship of the two Fairies— 
or Dream-Children, for I had not yet solved the problem 
as to who or what they were—whose sweet playfulness 
had shed a magic radiance over my life. 

In office-hours—which I suppose reduce most men to 
the mental condition of a coffee-mill or a mangle—time 
sped along much as usual: it was in the pauses of life, 
the desolate hours when books and newspapers palled on 
the sated appetite, and when, thrown back upon one's 
own dreary musings, one strove—all in vain—to people 
the vacant air with the dear faces of absent friends, that 
the real bitterness of solitude made itself felt. 

One evening, feeling my life a little more wearisome 
than usual, I strolled down to my Club, not so much with 
the hope of meeting any friend there, for London was 
now "out of town”, as with the feeling that here, at least, 
I should hear "sweet words of human speech”, and come 
into contact with human thought. 

However, almost the first face I saw there was that of 
a friend. Eric Lindon was lounging, with rather a "bored” 
expression of face, over a newspaper; and we fell into 
conversation with a mutual satisfaction which neither of 
us tried to conceal. 

After a while I ventured to introduce what was just 
then the main subject of my thoughts. "And so the Doc¬ 
tor”. (a name we had adopted by a tacit agreement, as a 

473 


474 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

convenient compromise between the formality of “Doctor 
Forester” and the intimacy—to which Eric Lindon 
hardly seemed entitled—of “Arthur”) “has gone abroad 
by this time, I suppose? Can you give me his present 
address?” 

“He is still at Elveston—I believe,” was the reply. 
“But I have not been there since I last met you.” 

I did not know which part of this intelligence to won¬ 
der at most. “And might I ask—if it isn’t taking too much 
of a liberty—when your wedding-bells are to—or perhaps 
they have rung, already?” 

“No,” said Eric, in a steady voice, which betrayed 
scarcely a trace of emotion: “that engagement is at an 
end. I am still ‘Benedick the unmarried man’.” 

After this, the thick-coming fancies—all radiant with 
new possibilities of happiness for Arthur—were far too 
bewildering to admit of any further conversation, and I 
was only too glad to avail myself of the first decent ex¬ 
cuse, that offered itself, for retiring into silence. 

The next day I wrote to Arthur, with as much of a 
reprimand for his long silence as I could bring myself 
to put into words, begging him to tell me how the world 
went with him. 

Needs must that three or four days—possibly more— 
should elapse before I could receive his reply; and never 
had I known days drag their slow length along with a 
more tedious indolence. 

To while away the time, I strolled, one afternoon, into 
Kensington Gardens, and, wandering aimlessly along 
any path that presented itself, I soon became aware that 
I had somehow strayed into one that was wholly new to 
me. Still, my elfish experiences seemed to have so com¬ 
pletely faded out of my life that nothing was further from 
my thoughts than the idea of again meeting my fairy- 
friends, when I chanced to notice a small creature, mov¬ 
ing among the grass that fringed the path, that did not 
seem to be an insect, or a frog, or any other living thing 
that I could think of. Cautiously kneeling down, and 



BRUNO’S LESSONS 


475 

making an ex tempore cage of my two hands, I imprisoned 
the little wanderer, and felt a sudden thrill of surprise and 
delight on discovering that my prisoner was no other than 
Bruno himself! 

Bruno took the matter very coolly, and, when I had 
replaced him on the ground, where he would be within 
easy conversational distance, he began talking, just as if 
it were only a few minutes since last we had met. 

“Doos oo know what the Rule is”, he en quired, “when 
oo catches a Fairy, withouten its having tolded oo where 
it was?” (Bruno’s notions of English Grammar had cer¬ 
tainly not improved since our last meeting.) 

“No,” I said. “I didn’t know there was any Rule about 
it.” 

“I think oo’ve got a right to eat me,” said the little 
fellow, looking up into my face with a winning smile. 
“But I’m not pruffickly sure. Oo’d better not do it wizout 
asking.” 

It did indeed seem reasonable not to take so irrevocable 
a step as that, without due enquiry. “I’ll certainly ask 
about it, first,” I said. “Besides, I don’t know yet whether 
you would be worth eating!” 

“I guess I’m deliciously good to eat,” Bruno remarked 
in a satisfied tone, as if it were something to be rather 
proud of. 

“And what are you doing here, Bruno?” 

“That's not my name!” said my cunning little friend. 
“Don’t oo know my name’s ‘Oh Bruno!’? That’s what 
Sylvie always calls me, when I says mine lessons.” 

“Well then, what are you doing here, oh Bruno?” 

“Doing mine lessons, a-course!” With that roguish 
twinkle in his eye, that always came when he knew he 
was talking nonsense. 

“Oh, that’s the way you do your lessons, is it? And do 
you remember them well?” 

“Always can ’member mine lessons,” said Bruno. “It’s 
Sylvie’s lessons that’s so dreffully hard to 'member!” He 
frowned, as if in agonies of thought, and tapped his fore- 



476 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

head with his knuckles. "I can’t think enough to under 
stand them!” he said despairingly. "It wants double 
thinking, I believe!” 

“But where’s Sylvie gone?” 

"That’s just what I want to know!” said Bruno dis¬ 
consolately. "What ever’s the good of setting me lessons, 
when she isn’t here to ’splain the hard bits?” 

“I’ll find her for you!” I volunteered; and, getting up, 
I wandered round the tree under whose shade I had been 
reclining, looking on all sides for Sylvie. In another min¬ 
ute I again noticed some strange thing moving among the 
grass, and, kneeling down, was immediately confronted 
with Sylvie’s innocent face, lighted up with a joyful sur¬ 
prise at seeing me, and was accosted, in the sweet voice I 
knew so well, with what seemed to be the end of a sentence 
whose beginning I had failed to catch. 

"-and I think he ought to have finished them by 

this time. So I’m going back to him. Will you come too? 
It’s only just round at the other side of this tree.” 

It was but a few steps for me; but it was a great 
many for Sylvie; and I had to be very careful to walk 
slowly, in order not to leave the little creature so far be¬ 
hind as to lose sight of her. 

To find Bruno’s lessons was easy enough: they ap¬ 
peared to be neatly written out on large smooth ivy- 
leaves, which were scattered in some confusion over a 
little patch of ground where the grass had been worn 
away; but the pale student, who ought by rights to have 
been bending over them, was nowhere to be seen: we 
looked in all directions, for some time in vain; but 
at last Sylvie’s sharp eyes detected him, swinging on a 
tendril of ivy, and Sylvie's stern voice commanded 
his instant return to terra firma and to the business of 
Life. 

"Pleasure first and business afterwards” seemed to be 
the motto of these tiny folk, so many hugs and kisses 
had to be interchanged before anything else could be 
done. 



BRUNO'S LESSONS 


477 

“Now, Bruno,” Sylvie said reproachfully, “didn’t I tell 
you you were to go on with your lessons, unless you 
heard to the contrary?” 

“But I did heard to the contrary!” Bruno insisted, with 
a mischievous twinkle in his eye. 

“What did you hear, you wicked boy?” 

“It were a sort of noise in the air,” said Bruno: “a sort 
of a scrambling noise. Didn't oo hear it, Mister Sir?” 

“Well, anyhow, you needn’t go to sleep over them, 
you lazy-lazy!” For Bruno had curled himself up, on 
the largest “lesson”, and was arranging another as a 
pillow. 

“I wasn’t asleep!” said Bruno, in a deeply-injured 
tone. "When I shuts mine eyes, it’s to show that I’m 
awakeV’ 

“Well, how much have you learned, then?” 

“I’ve learned a little tiny bit,” said Bruno, modestly, 
being evidently afraid of overstating his achievement. 
“Ca’n’t learn no more!” 

“Oh Bruno! You know you can, if you like.” 

"Course I can, if I like,” the pale student replied; "but 
leant if I don’t like!” 

Sylvie had a way—which I could not too highly admire 
—of evading Bruno’s logical perplexities by suddenly 
striking into a new line of thought; and this masterly 
stratagem she now adopted. 

“Well, I must say one thing-” 

“Did oo know, Mister Sir,” Bruno thoughtfully re¬ 
marked, “that Sylvie ca’n’t count? Whenever she says ‘I 
must say one thing’, I know quite well she’ll say two 
things! And she always doos.” 

“Two heads are better than one, Bruno,” I said, but 
with no very distinct idea as to what I meant by it. 

“I shouldn’t mind having two heads,” Bruno said soft¬ 
ly to himself: “one head to eat mine dinner, and one head 
to argue wiz Sylvie—doos oo think oo’d look prettier if 
oo’d got vwo heads, Mister Sir?” 

The case did not, I assured him, admit of a doubt. 



478 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“The reason why Sylvie’s so cross-’’ Bruno went on 

very seriously, almost sadly. 

Sylvie’s eyes grew large and round with surprise at 
this new line of enquiry—her rosy face being perfectly 
radiant with good humour. But she said nothing. 

“Wouldn’t it be better so tell me after the lessons are 
over?” I suggested. 

“Very well,” Bruno said with a resigned air: “only she 
wo’n’t be cross then.” 

“There’s only three lessons to do,” said Sylvie. “Spell¬ 
ing, and Geography, and Singing.” 

“Not Arithmetic ?” I said. 

“No, he hasn’t a head for Arithmetic-” 

“Course I haven’t!” said Bruno. “Mine head’s for hair . 
I haven’t got a lot of heads!” 

“—and he ca’n't learn his Multiplication-table-” 

“I like History ever so much better,” Bruno remarked. 
“Oo has to repeat that Muddlecome table-” 

“Well, and you have to repeat-” 

“No, 00 hasn’t!” Bruno interrupted. “History repeats 
itself. The Professor said so!” 

Sylvie was arranging some letters on a board— 
E—V—I—L. “Now, Bruno,” she said, “what does that 
spell?” 

Bruno looked at it, in solemn silence, for a minute. 
“I know what it doesn’t spell!” he said at last. 

“That’s no good,” said Sylvie. “What does it spell?” 

Bruno took another look at the mysterious letters. 
“Why, it’s ‘LIVE’, backwards!” he exclaimed. (I thought 
it was, indeed.) 

“How did you manage to see that?” said Sylvie. 

“I just twiddled my eyes,” said Bruno, “and then I 
saw it directly. Now may I sing the King-fisher Song?” 

“Geography next,” said Sylvie. “Don’t you know the 
Rules?” 

“I think there oughtn’t to be such a lot of Rules, 
Sylvie! I thinks-” 

“Yes. there ought to be such a lot of Rules, you wicked, 



BRUNO’S LESSONS 


479 

wicked boy! And how dare you think at all about it? 
And shut up that mouth directly!” 

So, as "that mouth” didn’t seem inclined to shut up of 
itself, Sylvie shut it for him—with both hands—and 
sealed it with a kiss, just as you would fasten up a letter. 

“Now that Bruno is fastened up from talking,” she 
went on, turning to me, “I'll show you the Map he does 
his lessons on.” 

And there it was, a large Map of the World, spread out 
on the ground. It was so large that Bruno had to crawl 
about on it, to point out the places named in the “King¬ 
fisher Lesson”. 

“When a King-fisher sees a Lady-bird flying away, he 
says ‘Ceylon, if you CandiaV And when he catches it, 
he says ‘Come to Medial And if you’re Hungary or 
thirsty, I’ll give you some NubiaV When he takes it in 
his claws, he says ‘EuropeY When he puts it into his 
beak, he says ‘Indial’ When he’s swallowed it, he says 
•EtonV That’s all.” 

“That’s quite perfect,” said Sylvie. "Now, you may 
sing the King-fisher Song.” 

“Will oo sing the chorus?” Bruno said to me. 

I was just beginning to say "I’m afraid I don’t know 
the words” , when Sylvie silently turned the map over, 
and I found the words were all written on the back. In 
one respect it was a very peculiar song: the chorus to 
each verse came in the middle, instead of at the end of it. 
However, the tune was so easy that I soon picked it up, 
and managed the chorus as well, perhaps, as it is possible 
for one person to manage such a thing. It was in vain that 
I signed to Sylvie to help me: she only smiled sweetly and 
shook her head. 

“ King Fisher courted Lady Bird — 

Sing Beans, sing Bones, sing Butterflies! 

‘Find me my match,’ he said, 

‘With such a noble head — 

With such a beard, as white as curd — 

With such expressive eyes!’ 



480 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“ ‘ Yet pins have heads,’ said Lady Bird — 

Sing Prunes, sing Prawns, sing Primrose-Hill! 

'And, where you stick them in. 

They stay, and thus a pin 
Is very much to be preferred 
To one that’s never still!' 

" ‘Oysters have beards,’ said Lady Bird — 

Sing Flies, sing Frogs, sing Fiddle-strings! 

‘I love them, for I know 
They never chatter so: 

They would not say one single word — 

Not if you crowned them Kings!’ 

" ‘Needles have eyes,’ said Lady Bird — 

Sing Cats, sing Corks, sing Cowslip-tea! 

'And they are sharp—just what 
Your Majesty is not: 

So get you gone—’tis too absurd 
To come a-courting me!’ ” 

“So he went away,” Bruno added as a kind of post¬ 
script, when the last note of the song had died away, 
“Just like he always did.” 

“Oh, my dear Bruno!” Sylvie exclaimed, with her 
hands over her ears. “You shouldn’t say ‘like’: you should 
say ‘what ’.” 

To which Bruno replied, doggedly, “I only says 'what!' 
when 00 doosn’t speak loud, so as I can hear 00.” 

“Where did he go to?” I asked, hoping to prevent an 
argument. 

“He went more far than he’d never been before,” said 
Bruno. 

“You should never say 'more far’,” Sylvie corrected 
him: “you should say ‘farther ’.” 

“Then 00 shouldn’t say 'more broth’, when we’re at 
dinner,” Bruno retorted: “00 should say ‘brother’l” 

This time Sylvie evaded an argument by turning away, 
and beginning to roll up the Map. “Lessons are over!” 
she proclaimed in her sweetest tones. 



BRUNO’S LESSONS 


481 

“And has there been no crying over them?” I en¬ 
quired. “Little boys always cry over their lessons, don't 
they?” 

“I never cries after twelve o’clock,” said Bruno: 

“ ’cause then it’s getting so near to dinner-time.” 

“Sometimes, in the morning,” Sylvie said in a low 
voice; “when it’s Geography-day, and when he’s been 
disobe-” 

“What a fellow you are to talk, Sylvie!” Bruno hastily 
interposed. “Doos 00 think the world was made for 00 to 
talk in?” 

“Why, where would you have me talk, then?” Sylvie 
said, evidently quite ready for an argument. 

But Bruno answered resolutely. “I’m not going to 
argue about it, 'cause it's getting late, and there wo’n't 
be time—but oo’s as 'ong as ever 00 can be!” And he 
rubbed the back of his hand across his eyes, in which 
tears were beginning to glitter. 

Sylvie’s eyes filled with tears in a moment. “I didn’t 
mean it, Bruno, darlingl” she whispered; and the rest of 
the argument was lost “amid the tangles of Nesera’s 
hair”, while the two disputants hugged and kissed each 
other. 

But this new form of argument was brought to a sud¬ 
den end by a flash of lightriing, which was closely fol¬ 
lowed by a peal of thunder, and by a torrent of rain¬ 
drops, which came hissing and spitting, almost like live 
creatures, through the leaves of the tree that sheltered us. 
“Why, it's raining cats and dogs!” I said. 

“And all the dogs has come down first,” said Bruno: 
“there’s nothing but cats coming down now!” 

In another minute the pattering ceased, as suddenly as 
it had begun. I stepped out from under the tree, and 
found that the storm was over; but I looked in vain, on 
my return, for my tiny companions. They had vanished 
with the storm, and there was nothing for it but to make 
the best of my way home. 

On the table lay, awaiting my return, an envelope of 



482 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

that peculiar yellow tint which always announces a tele¬ 
gram, and which must be, in the memories of so many 
of us, inseparably linked with some great and sudden 
sorrow—something that has cast a shadow, never in this 
world to be wholly lifted off, on the brightness of Life. 
No doubt it has also heralded—for many of us—some 
sudden news of joy; but this, I think, is less common: 
human life seems, on the whole, to contain more of sor¬ 
row than of joy. And yet the world goes on. Who knows 
why? 

This time, however, there was no shock of sorrow to be 
faced: in fact, the few words it contained (“Could not 
bring myself to write. Come soon. Always welcome. A 
letter follows this. Arthur.”) seemed so like Arthur him¬ 
self speaking, that it gave me quite a thrill of pleasure, 
and I at once began the preparations needed for the 
journey. 


Chapter II 
Love’s Curfew 

“Fayfield Junction! Change for Elveston!” 

What subtle memory could there be, linked to these 
commonplace words, that caused such a flood of happy 
thoughts to fill my brain? I dismounted from the car¬ 
riage in a state of joyful excitement for which I could not 
at first account. True, I had taken this very journey, and 
at the same hour of the day, six months ago; but many 
things had happened since then, and an old man’s mem¬ 
ory has but a slender hold on recent events: I sought “the 
missing link” in vain. Suddenly I caught sight of a bench 
—the only one provided on the cheerless platform—with 
a lady seated on it, and the whole forgotten scene flashed 
upon me as vividly as if it were happening over again. 



love's curfew 


483 

"Yes,” I thought. ‘‘This bare platform is, for me, rich 
with the memory of a dear friend! She was sitting on 
that very bench, and invited me to share it, with some 
quotation from Shakespeare—I forget what. I’ll try the 
Earl’s plan for the Dramatization of Life, and fancy that 
figure to be Lady Muriel; and I wo’n’t undeceive myself 
too soon!” 

So I strolled along the platform, resolutely “making- 
believe” (as children say) that the casual passenger, 
seated on that bench, was the Lady Muriel I remembered 
so well. She was facing away from me, which aided the 
elaborate cheatery I was practising on myself: but, 
though I was careful, in passing the spot, to look the 
other way, in order to prolong the pleasant illusion, it 
was inevitable that, when I turned to walk back again, I 
should see who it was. It was Lady Muriel herself! 

The whole scene now returned vividly to my memory; 
and, to make this repetition of it stranger still, there was 
the same old man, whom I remembered seeing so rough¬ 
ly ordered off, by the Station-Master, to make room for 
his titled passenger. The same, but ‘‘with a difference”: 
no longer tottering feebly along the platform, but actu¬ 
ally seated at Lady Muriel’s side, and in conversation 
with her! “Yes, put it in your purse,” she was saying, 
“and remember you’re to spend it all for Minnie. And 
mind you bring her something nice, that’ll do her real 
good! And give her my love!” So intent was she on say¬ 
ing these words, that, although the sound of my foot¬ 
step had made her lift her head and look at me, she did 
not at first recognize me. 

I raised my hat as I approached, and then there flashed 
across her face a genuine look of joy, which so exactly 
recalled the sweet face of Sylvie, when last we met in 
Kensington Gardens, that I felt quite bewildered. 

Rather than disturb the poor old man at her side, she 
rose from her seat, and joined me in my walk up and 
down the platform, and for a minute or two our con¬ 
versation was as utterly trivial and commonplace as if 



484 SYLVIE AND BEUNO CONCLUDED 

we were merely two casual guests in a London drawing¬ 
room. Each of us seemed to shrink, just at first, from 
touching on the deeper interests which linked our lives 
together. 

The Elveston train had drawn up at the platform, 
while we talked; and, in obedience to the Station- 
Master's obsequious hint of “This way, my Lady! Time’s 
up!”, we were making the best of our way towards the 
end which contained the sole first-class carriage, and were 
just passing the now-empty bench, when Lady Muriel 
noticed, lying on it, the purse in which her gift had just 
been so carefully bestowed, the owner of which, all un¬ 
conscious of his loss, was being helped into a carriage at 
the other end of the train. She pounced on it instantly. 
“Poor old man!” she cried. “He mustn’t go off, and think 
he’s lost it!” 

“Let me run with it! I can go quicker than you!” I 
said. But she was already half-way down the platform, 
flying (“running” is much too mundane a word for such 
fairy-like motion) at a pace that left all possible efforts 
of mine hopelessly in the rear. 

She was back again before I had well completed my 
audacious boast of speed in running, and was saying, 
quite demurely, as we entered our carriage, “and you 
really think you could have done it quicker?” 

“No, indeed!” I replied. “I plead ‘Guilty’ of gross ex¬ 
aggeration, and throw myself on the mercy of the Court!” 

“The Court will overlook it—for this once!” Then her 
manner suddenly changed from playfulness to an anxious 
gravity. 

“You are not looking your best!” she said with an 
anxious glance. “In fact, I think you look more of an 
invalid than when you left us. I very much doubt if 
London agrees with you?” 

“It may be the London air,” I said, “or it may be the 
hard work—or my rather lonely life: anyhow, I’ve not 
been feeling very well, lately. But Elveston will soon set 
me up again. Arthur’s prescription—he’s my doctor, you 



love’s curfew 485 

know, and I heard from him this morning—is ‘plenty of 
ozone, and new milk, and pleasant society ’!” 

“Pleasant society?” said Lady Muriel, with a pretty 
make-believe of considering the question. “Well, really I 
don’t know where we can find that for you! We have so 
few neighbours. But new milk we can manage. Do get it 
of my old friend Mrs. Hunter, up there, on the hill-side. 
You may rely upon the quality. And her little Bessie 
comes to school every day, and passes your lodgings. So it 
would be very easy to send it.” 

“I’ll follow your advice with pleasure,” I said; “and 
I’ll go and arrange about it to-morrow. I know Arthur 
will want a walk.” 

“You’ll find it quite an easy walk—under three miles, I 
think.” 

“Well, now that we’ve settled that point, let me retort 
your own remark upon yourself. I don’t think you're 
looking quite your best!” 

“I daresay not,” she replied in a low voice; and a sud¬ 
den shadow seemed to overspread her face. “I’ve had 
some troubles lately. It’s a matter about which I’ve been 
long wishing to consult you, but I couldn’t easily write 
about it. I’m so glad to have this opportunity!” 

“Do you think”, she began again, after a minute’s 
silence, and with a visible embarrassment of manner 
most unusual in her, “that a promise, deliberately and 
solemnly given, is always binding—except, of course, 
where its fulfilment would involve some actual sin?” 

“I ca’n’t think of any other exception at this moment,” 
I said. “That branch of casuistry is usually, I believe, 
treated as a question of truth and untruth-” 

“Surely that is the principle?” she eagerly interrupted. 
“I always thought the Bible-teaching about it consisted 
of such texts ‘lie not one to another’ ? ” 

“I have thought about that point,” I replied; “and it 
seems to me that the essence of lying is the intention of 
deceiving. If you give a promise, fully intending to fulfil 
it, you are certainly acting truthfully then', and, if you 



486 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

afterwards break it, that does not involve any deception. 
I cannot call it untruthful.” 

Another pause of silence ensued. Lady Muriel's face 
was hard to read: she looked pleased, I thought, but also 
puzzled; and I felt curious to know whether her question 
had, as I began to suspect, some bearing on the break¬ 
ing off of her engagement with Captain (now Major) 
Lindon. 

“You have relieved me from a great fear," she said; 
“but the thing is of course wrong, somehow. What texts 
would you quote, to prove it wrong?” 

“Any that enforce the payment of debts. If A promises 
something to B, B has a claim upon A. And A’s sin, if he 
breaks his promise, seems to me more analogous to steal¬ 
ing than to lying.” 

“It’s a new way of looking at it—to me,” she said; “but 
it seems a true way, also. However, I wo'n’t deal in gener¬ 
alities, with an old friend like you! For we are old friends, 
somehow. Do you know, I think we began as old friends?” 
she said with a playfulness of tone that ill accorded with 
the tears that glistened in her eyes. 

“Thank you very much for saying so,” I replied. “I 
like to think of you as an old friend,” (“—though you 
don’t look it!” would have been the almost necessary 
sequence, with any other lady; but she and I seemed to 
have long passed out of the time when compliments, or 
any such trivialities, were possible). 

Here the train paused at a station, where two or three 
passengers entered the carriage; so no more was said till 
we had reached our journey’s end. 

On our arrival at El vest on, she readily adopted my 
suggestion that we should walk up together; so, as soon as 
our luggage had been duly taken charge of—hers by the 
servant who met her at the station, and mine by one of 
the porters—we set out together along the familiar lanes, 
now linked in my memory with so many delightful associ¬ 
ations. Lady Muriel at once recommenced the conversa¬ 
tion at the point where it had been interrupted. 



love’s curfew 487 

“You knew of my engagement to my cousin Eric. Did 
you also hear-” 

“Yes,” I interrupted, anxious to spare her the pain of 
giving any details. “I heard it had all come to an end.” 

“I would like to tell you how it happened,” she said; 
“as that is the very point I want your advice about. I had 
long realized that we were not in sympathy in religious 
belief. His ideas of Christianity are very shadowy; and 
even as to the existence of a God he lives in a sort of 
dreamland. But it has not affected his life! I feel sure, 
now, that the most absolute Atheist may be leading, 
though walking blindfold, a pure and noble life. And if 
you knew half the good deeds-” she broke off sud¬ 

denly, and turned away her head. 

“I entirely agree with you,” I said. “And have we not 
our Saviour’s own promise that such a life shall surely 
lead to the light?” 

“Yes, I know it,” she said in a broken voice, still keep¬ 
ing her head turned away. “And so I told him. He said he 
would believe, for my sake, if he could. And he wished 
for my sake, he could see things as I did. But that is all 
wrong!” she went on passionately. “God cannot approve 
such low motives as that! Still it was not I that broke it 
off. I knew he loved me; and I had promised ; and-” 

“Then it was he that broke it off?” 

“He released me unconditionally.” She faced me again 
now, having quite recovered her usual calmness of man¬ 
ner. 

“Then what difficulty remains?” 

“It is this, that I don’t believe he did it of his own free 
will. Now, supposing he hid it against his will, merely to 
satisfy my scruples, would not his claim on me remain 
just as strong as ever? And would not my promise be as 
binding as ever? My father says ‘no’; but I ca’n't help 
fearing he is biased by his love for me. And I've asked no 
one else. I have many friends—friends for the bright sunny 
weather; not friends for the clouds and storms of life; not 
old friends like you!” 



4&8 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

"Let me think a little,” I said: and for some minutes 
we walked on in silence, while, pained to the heart at 
seeing the bitter trial that had come upon this pure and 
gentle soul, I strove in vain to see my way through the 
tangled skein of conflicting motives. 

“If she loves him truly”, (I seemed at last to grasp the 
clue to the problem) “is not that, for her the voice of God? 
May she not hope that she is sent to him, even as Ananias 
was sent to Saul in his blindness, that he may receive his 
sight?” Once more I seemed to hear Arthur whispering 
“What knowest thou, 0 wife, whether thou shalt save thy 
husband?" and I broke the silence with the words “If you 
still love him truly-” 

“I do not\ ” she hastily interrupted. “At least—not in 
that way. I believe I loved him when I promised; but I 
was very young: it is hard to know. But, whatever the 
feeling was, it is dead now. The motive on his side is 
Love: on mine it is—Duty!” 

Again there was a long silence. The whole skein of 
thought was tangled worse than ever. This time she broke 
the silence. “Don’t misunderstand me!” she said. “When 
I said my heart was not his, I did not mean it was any one 
else’s! At present I feel bound to him; and, till I know I 
am absolutely free, in the sight of God, to love any other 
than him, I’ll never even think of any one else—in that 
way, I mean. I would die sooner!” I had never imagined 
my gentle friend capable of such passionate utterances. 

I ventured on no further remark until we had nearly 
arrived at the Hall-gate; but, the longer I reflected, the 
clearer it became to me that no call of Duty demanded 
the sacrifice—possibly of the happiness of a life—which 
she seemed ready to make. I tried to make this clear to 
her also, adding some warnings on the dangers that surely 
awaited a union in which mutual love was wanting. "The 
only argument for it, worth considering,” I said in con¬ 
clusion, “seems to be his supposed reluctance in releasing 
you from your promise. I have tried to give to that argu¬ 
ment its fuU weight, and my conclusion is that it does not 



love’s curfew 


489 

affect the rights of the case, or invalidate the release he 
has given you. My belief is that you are entirely free to act 
as now seems right.” 

“I am very grateful to you,” she said earnestly. “Be¬ 
lieve it, please! I ca’n’t put it into proper words!” and the 
subject was dropped by mutual consent: and I only 
learned, long afterwards, that our discussion had really 
served to dispel the doubts that had harassed her so long. 

We parted at the Hall-gate, and I found Arthur eagerly 
awaiting my arrival; and, before we parted for the night, 
I had heard the whole story—how he had put off his jour¬ 
ney from day to day, feeling that he could not go away 
from the place till his fate had been irrevocably settled by 
the wedding taking place: how the preparations for the 
wedding, and the excitement in the neighbourhood, had 
suddenly come to an end, and he had learned (from 
Major Lindon, who called to wish him good-bye) that 
the engagement had been broken off by mutual consent: 
how he had instantly abandoned all his plans for going 
abroad, and had decided to stay on at Elveston, for a year 
or two at any rate, till his newly-awakened hopes should 
prove true or false; and how, since that memorable day, 
he had avoided all meetings with Lady Muriel, fearing to 
betray his feelings before he had had any sufficient evi¬ 
dence as to how she regarded him. "But it is nearly six 
weeks since all that happened,” he said in conclusion, 
"and we can meet in the ordinary way, now, with no need 
for any painful allusions. I would have written to tell you 
all this: only I kept hoping from day to day that—that 
there would be more to tell!” 

"And how should there be more, you foolish fellow,” I 
fondly urged, "if you never even go near her? Do you 
expect the offer to come from herl ” 

Arthur was betrayed into a smile. "No,” he said, "I 
hardly expect that. But I’m a desperate coward. There’s 
no doubt about it!” 

"And what reasons have you heard of for breaking off 
the engagement ? ’' 



490 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“A good many,” Arthur replied, and proceeded to 
count them on his fingers. “First, it was found that she 
was dying of—something; so he broke it off. Then it was 
found that he was dying of—some other thing; so she 
broke it off. Then the Major turned out to be a confirmed 
gamester; so the Earl broke it off. Then the Earl insulted 
him; so the Major broke it off. It got a good deal broken 
off, all things considered!” 

“You have all this on the very best authority, of 
course?” 

“Oh, certainly! And communicated in the strictest con¬ 
fidence! Whatever defects Elveston society suffers from, 
want of information isn’t one of them!” 

“Nor reticence, either, it seems. But, seriously, do you 
know the real reason?” 

“No, I'm quite in the dark.” 

I did not feel that I had any right to enlighten him; so I 
changed the subject, to the less engrossing one of “new 
milk”, and we agreed that I should walk over, next day, 
to Hunter’s farm, Arthur undertaking to set me part of 
the way, after which he had to return to keep a business 
engagement. 


Chapter III 
Streaks of Dawn 

Next day proved warm and sunny, and we started early, 
to enjoy the luxury of a good long chat before he would 
be obliged to leave me. 

“This neighbourhood has more than its due propor¬ 
tion of the very poor,” I remarked, as we passed a group 
of hovels, too dilapidated to deserve the name of “cot¬ 
tages”. 

“But the few rich”, Arthur replied, “give more than 



STREAKS OF DAWN 49I 

their due proportion of help in charity. So the balance is 
kept.” 

‘‘I suppose the Earl does a good deal?” 

"He gives liberally; but he has not the health oi 
strength to do more. Lady Muriel does more in the way 
of school-teaching and cottage-visiting than she would 
like me to reveal.” 

"Then she, at least, is not one of the ‘idle mouths’ one 
so often meets with among the upper classes. I have some¬ 
times thought they would have a hard time of it, if sud¬ 
denly called on to give their raison d’etre, and to show 
cause why they should be allowed to live any longer!” 

"The whole subject”, said Arthur, "of what we may 
call ‘idle mouths’ (I mean persons who absorb some of 
the material wealth of a community—in the form of food, 
clothes, and so on—without contributing its equivalent 
in the form of productive labour) is a complicated one, no 
doubt. I’ve tried to think it out. And it seemed to me that 
the simplest form of the problem, to start with, is a com¬ 
munity without money, who buy and sell by barter only; 
and it makes it yet simpler to suppose the food and other 
things to be capable of keeping for many years without 
spoiling.” 

"Yours is an excellent plan,” I said. "What is your 
solution of the problem?” 

"The commonest type of ‘idle mouths’ ”, said Arthur, 
"is no doubt due to money being left by parents to their 
own children. So I imagined a man—either exceptionally 
clever, or exceptionally strong and industrious—who had 
contributed so much valuable labour to the needs of the 
community that its equivalent, in clothes, etc., was (say) 
five times as much as he needed for himself. We cannot 
deny his absolute right to give the superfluous wealth as 
he chooses. So, if he leaves four children behind him (say 
two sons and two daughters), with enough of all the 
necessaries of life to last them a life-time, I cannot see 
that the community is in any way wronged if they choose 
to do nothing in life but to ‘eat, drink, and be merry’. 



492 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

Most certainly, the community could not fairly say, in 
reference to them, ‘if a man will not work, neither let him 
eat.’ Their reply would be crushing. 'The labour has al¬ 
ready been done, which is a fair equivalent for the food 
we are eating; and you have had the benefit of it. On 
what principle of justice can you demand two quotas of 
work for one quota of food?’ ” 

"Yet surely", I said, "there is something wrong some¬ 
where, if these four people are well able to do useful work, 
and if that work is actually needed by the community, 
and they elect to sit idle?” 

"I think there is,” said Arthur: "but it seems to me to 
arise from a Law of God—that every one shall do as 
much as he can to help others—and not from any rights, 
on the part of the community, to exact labour as 
an equivalent for food that has already been fairly 
earned." 

"I suppose the second form of the problem is where the 
‘idle mouths’ possess money instead of material wealth?” 

"Yes," replied Arthur: "and I think the simplest case is 
that of paper-money. Gold is itself a form of material 
wealth; but a bank-note is merely a promise to hand over 
so much material wealth when called upon to do so. The 
father of these four ‘idle mouths’, had done (let us say) 
five thousand pounds’ worth of useful work for the com¬ 
munity. In return for this, the community had given him 
what amounted to a written promise to hand over, when¬ 
ever called upon to do so, five thousand pounds’ worth 
of food, etc. Then, if he only uses one thousand pounds’ 
worth himself, and leaves the rest of the notes to his chil¬ 
dren, surely they have a full right to present these written 
promises, and to say ‘hand over the food, for which the 
equivalent labour has been already done’. Now I think 
this case well worth stating, publicly and clearly. I should 
like to drive it into the heads of those Socialists who are 
priming our ignorant paupers with such sentiments as 
‘Look at them bloated haristocrats! Doing not a stroke o' 
work for theirselves, and living on the sweat of our 



STREAKS OF DAWN 


493 

brows!’ I should like to force them to see that the money, 
which those ‘haristocrats’ are spending, represents so 
much labour already done for the community, and whose 
equivalent, in material wealth, is due from the commun¬ 
ity.” 

“Might not the Socialists reply 'Much of this money 
does not represent honest labour at all. If you could trace 
it back, from owner to owner, though you might begin 
with several legitimate steps, such as gifts, or bequeath¬ 
ing by will, or ‘value received', you would soon reach an 
owner who had no moral right to it but had got it by 
fraud or other crimes; and of course his successors in the 
line would have no better right to it than he had.” 

“No doubt, no doubt,” Arthur replied. “But surely 
that involves the logical fallacy of proving too much ? It is 
quite as applicable to material wealth, as it is to money. 
If we once begin to go back beyond the fact that the 
present owner of certain property came by it honestly, 
and to ask whether any previous owner, in past ages, got 
it by fraud, would any property be secure?” 

After a minute’s thought, I felt obliged to admit the 
truth of this. 

"My general conclusion,” Arthur continued, “from the 
mere standpoint of human rights, man against man, was 
this—that if some wealthy 'idle mouth’, who has come by 
his money in a lawful way, even though not one atom of 
the labour it represents has been his own doing, chooses 
to spend it on his own needs, without contributing any 
labour to the community from whom he buys his food 
and clothes, that community has no right to interfere 
with him. But it’s quite another thing, when we come to 
consider the divine law. Measured by that standard, such 
a man is undoubtedly doing wrong, if he fails to use, for 
the good of those in need, the strength or the skill, that 
God has given him. That strength and skill do not belong 
to the community, to be paid to them as a debt : they do 
not belong to the man himself, to be used for his own en¬ 
joyment: they do belong to God, to be used according to 



494 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

His will; and we are not left in doubt as to what this will 
is. ‘Do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again.’ ” 

“Anyhow,” I said, “an ‘idle mouth' very often gives 
away a great deal in charity.” 

“In so-called ‘charity’,” he corrected me. “Excuse me if 
I seem to speak uncharitably. I would not dream of apply¬ 
ing the term to any individual. But I would say, generally, 
that a man who gratifies every fancy that occurs to him— 
denying himself in nothing —and merely gives to the poor 
some part, or even all, of his superfluous wealth, is only 
deceiving himself if he calls it charity.” 

“But, even in giving away superfluous wealth, he may 
be denying himself the miser’s pleasure in hoarding?” 

“I grant you that, gladly,” said Arthur. “Given that he 
has that morbid craving, he is doing a good deed in re¬ 
straining it.” 

“But, even in spending on himself”, I persisted, “our 
typical rich man often does good, by employing people 
who would otherwise be out of work: and that is often 
better than pauperizing them by giving the money.” 

“I’m glad you’ve said that!” said Arthur. "I would not 
like to quit the subject without exposing the two fallacies 
of that statement—which have gone so long uncontra¬ 
dicted that Society now accepts it as an axiom!” 

“What are they?” I said. “I don’t even see owe, myself.” 

“One is merely the fallacy of ambiguity —the assump¬ 
tion that ‘ doing good’ (that is, benefiting somebody) is 
necessarily a good thing to do (that is, a right thing). The 
other is the assumption that, if one of two specified acts 
is better than another, it is necessarily a good act in itself. 
I should like to call this the fallacy of comparison —mean¬ 
ing that it assumes that what is comparatively good is 
therefore positively good.” 

“Then what is your test of a good act?” 

“That it shall be our best,” Arthur confidently replied. 
“And even then 'we are unprofitable servants’. But let me 
illustrate the two fallacies. Nothing illustrates a fallacy so 
well as an extreme case, which fairly comes under it. 



STREAKS OF DAWN 


495 

Suppose I find two children drowning in a pond. I rush 
in, and save one of the children, and then walk away, 
leaving the other to drown. Clearly I have 'done good’ , in 

saving a child’s life? But-Again, supposing I meet an 

inoffensive stranger, and knock him down and walk on. 
Clearly that is ‘ better ’ than if I had proceeded to jump 
upon him and break his ribs? But-” 

“Those ‘buts’ are quite unanswerable,” I said. “But I 
should like an instance from real life.” 

“Well, let us take one of those abominations of modern 
Society, a Charity-Bazaar. It’s an interesting question to 
think out—how much of the money, that reaches the ob¬ 
ject in view, is genuine charity; and whether even that is 
spent in the best way. But the subject needs regular classi¬ 
fication, and analysis, to understand it properly.” 

“I should be glad to have it analysed,” I said: “it has 
often puzzled me.” 

“Well, if I am really not boring you. Let us suppose our 
Charity-Bazaar to have been organized to aid the funds 
of some Hospital: and that A, B, C give their services in 
making articles to sell, and in acting as salesmen, while 
X, Y, Z buy the articles, and the money so paid goes to 
the Hospital. 

“There are two distinct species of such Bazaars: one, 
where the payment exacted is merely the market-value of 
the goods supplied, that is, exactly what you would have 
to pay at a shop: the other, where fancy-prices are asked. 
We must take these separately. 

“First, the ‘market-value’ case. Here A, B, C are exact¬ 
ly in the same position as ordinary shopkeepers; the only 
difference being that they give the proceeds to the Hospi¬ 
tal. Practically, they are giving their skilled labour for the 
benefit of the Hospital. This seems to me to be genuine 
charity. And I don’t see how they could use it better. But 
X, Y, Z are exactly in the same position as any ordinary 
purchasers of goods. To talk of ‘charity’ in connection 
with their share of the business, is sheer nonsense. Yet 
they are very likely to do so. 



496 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“Secondly, the case of ‘fancy-prices’. Here I think the 
simplest plan is to divide the payment into two parts, the 
‘market-value’ and the excess over that. The ‘market- 
value’ part is on the same footing as in the first case: the 
excess is all we have to consider. Well, A, B, C do not 
earn it; so we may put them out of the question: it is a 
gift, from X, Y, Z, to the Hospital. And my opinion is that 
it is not given in the best way: far better buy what they 
choose to buy, and give what they choose to give, as two 
separate transactions: then there is some chance that their 
motive in giving may be real charity, instead of a mixed 
motive—half charity, half self-pleasing. ‘The trail of the 
serpent is over it all.' And therefore it is that I hold all 
such spurious ‘Charities' in utter abomination!” He ended 
with unusual energy, and savagely beheaded, with his 
stick, a tall thistle at the road-side, behind which I was 
startled to see Sylvie and Bruno standing. I caught at his 
arm, but too late to stop him. Whether the stick reached 
them, or not, I could not feel sure: at any rate they 
took not the smallest notice of it, but smiled gaily, and 
nodded to me: and I saw at once that they were only 
visible to me: the “eerie” influence had not reached to 
Arthur. 

“Why did you try to save it?” he said. “That’s not the 
wheedling Secretary of a Charity-Bazaar! I only wish it 
were!” he added grimly. 

“Does 00 know, that stick went right froo my head!” 
said Bruno. (They had run round to me by this time, and 
each had secured a hand.) “Just under my chin! I are glad 
I aren’t a thistle!” 

“Well, we’ve threshed that subject out, anyhow!” 
Arthur resumed. “I’m afraid I’ve been talking too much, 
for your patience and for my strength. I must be turning 
soon. This is about the end of my tether.” 

“Take, O boatman, thrice thy fee; 

Take, I give it willingly; 

For, invisible to thee. 

Spirits twain have crossed with me!" 



STREAKS OF DAWN 


497 


I quoted, involuntarily. 

"For utterly inappropriate and irrelevant quotations,” 
laughed Arthur, "you are ‘ekalled by few, and excelled by 
none’!” And we strolled on. 

As we passed the head of the lane that led down to the 
beach, I noticed a single figure moving slowly along it, 
seawards. She was a good way off, and had her back to 
us: but it was Lady Muriel, unmistakably. Knowing that 
Arthur had not seen her, as he had been looking, in the 
other direction, at a gathering rain-cloud, I made no 
remark, but tried to think of some plausible pretext for 
sending him back by the sea. 

The opportunity instantly presented itself. "I'm 
getting tired,” he said. "I don't think it would be prudent 
to go further. I had better turn here.” 

I turned with him, for a few steps, and as we again 
approached the head of the lane, I said, as carelessly as I 
could, "Don't go back by the road. It's too hot and dusty. 
Down this lane, and along the beach, is nearly as short; 
and you’ll get a breeze off the sea.” 

"Yes, I think I will,” Arthur began; but at that mom¬ 
ent we came into sight of Lady Muriel, and he checked 
himself. "No, it’s too far round. Yet it certainly would be 

cooler-" He stood, hesitating, looking first one way 

and then the other—a melancholy picture of utter in¬ 
firmity of purpose! 

How long this humiliating scene would have continued, 
if I had been the only external influence, it is impossible 
to say; for at this moment Sylvie, with a swift decision 
worthy of Napoleon himself, took the matter into her 
own hands. “You go and drive her, up this way,” she said 
to Bruno. "I’ll get him along!” And she took hold of the 
stick that Arthur was carrying, and gently pulled him 
down the lane. 

He was totally unconscious that any will but his own 
was acting on the stick, and appeared to think it had 
taken a horizontal position simply because he was point¬ 
ing with it. "Are not those orchises under the hedge 

R L.C. 



498 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

there?” he said. “I think that decides me. I'll gather 
some as I go along.” 

Meanwhile Bruno had run on behind Lady Muriel, 
and, with much jumping about and shouting (shouts 
audible to no one but Sylvie and myself), much as if he 
were driving sheep, he managed to turn her round and 
make her walk, with eyes demurely cast upon the 
ground, in our direction. 

The victory was ours! And, since it was evident that 
the lovers, thus urged together, must meet in another 
minute, I turned and walked on, hoping that Sylvie and 
Bruno would follow my example, as I felt sure that the 
fewer the spectators the better it would be for Arthur and 
his good angel. 

“And what sort of meeting was it?” I wondered, as I 
paced dreamily on. 


Chapter IV 
The Dog-King 

“They shooked hands,” said Bruno, who was trotting 
at my side, in answer to the unspoken question. 

“And they looked ever so pleased!” Sylvie added from 
the other side. 

“Well, we must get on, now, as quick as we can,” I 
said. “If only I knew the best way to Hunter’s farm!” 

“They’ll be sure to know in this cottage,” said Sylvie. 

“Yes, I suppose they will. Bruno, would you run in 
and ask?” 

Sylvie stopped him, laughingly, as he ran off. “Wait a 
minute,” she said. “I must make you visible first, you 
know.” 

“And audible too, I suppose?” I said, as she took the 



THE DOG-KING 499 

jewel, that hung round her neck, and waved it over his 
head, and touched his eyes and lips with it. 

“Yes," said Sylvie: “and once, do you know, I made 
him audible, and forgot to make him visiblel And he 
went to buy some sweeties in a shop. And the man was so 
frightened! A voice seemed to come out of the air, ‘Please, 
I want two ounces of barley-sugar drops!’ And a shilling 
came bang down upon the counter! And the man said ‘I 
ca’n’t see you!’ And Bruno said ‘It doosn’t sinnify seeing 
me, so long as oo can see the shillingY But the man said 
he never sold barley-sugar drops to people he couldn’t 
see. So we had to— Now, Bruno, you’re ready!" And away 
he trotted. 

Sylvie spent the time, while we were waiting for him, 
in making herself visible also. “It’s rather awkward, you 
know," she explained to me, “when we meet people, and 
they can see one of us, and ca’n’t see the otherl” 

In a minute or two Bruno returned, looking rather dis¬ 
consolate. “He’d got friends with him, and he were 
cross!” he said. “He asked me who I were. And I said 
‘I’m Bruno: who is these peoples?’ And he said ‘One’s my 
half-brother, and t’other’s my half-sister: and I don't 
want no more company! Go along with yer!’ And I said 
‘I ca’n’t go along wizout mine self!’ And I said ‘Oo 
shouldn’t have bits of peoples lying about like that! It’s 
welly untidy!’ And he said ‘Oh, don’t talk to meY And he 
pushted me outside! And he shutted the door!” 

“And you never asked where Hunter’s farm was?” 
queried Sylvie. 

“Hadn’t room for any questions," said Bruno. “The 
room were so crowded.” 

“Three people couldn’t crowd a room,” said Sylvie. 

“They did, though,” Bruno persisted. “He crowded it 
most. He’s such a welly thick man—so as oo couldn’t 
knock him down.” 

I failed to see the drift of Bruno’s argument. “Surely 
anybody could be knocked down,” I said: “thick or thin 
wouldn’t matter.” 



500 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“Oo couldn’t knock him down,” said Bruno. “He's 
more wide than he’s high: so, when he’s lying down he’s 
more higher than when he’s standing: so a-course oo 
couldn’t knock him down\” 

“Here’s another cottage,” I said: “ I’ll ask the way, this 
time.” 

There was no need to go in, this time, as the woman 
was standing in the doorway, with a baby in her arms, 
talking to a respectably dressed man—a farmer, as I 
guessed—who seemed to be on his way to the town. 

“—and when there’s drink to be had,” he was saying, 
“he’s just the worst o’ the lot, is your Willie. So they tell 
me. He gets fairly mad wi’ it!” 

“I’d have given ’em the lie to their faces, a twelve- 
month back!” the woman said in a broken voice. “But 
a’ canna noo! A’ canna noo!” She checked herself on 
catching sight of us, and hastily retreated into the house, 
shutting the door after her. 

“Perhaps you can tell me where Hunter’s farm is?” I 
said to the man, as he turned away from the house. 

“I can that, Sir!” he replied with a smile. “I’m John 
Hunter hissel, at your sarvice. It’s nobbut half a mile 
further—the only house in sight, when you get round bend 
o’ the road yonder. You’ll find my good woman within, if 
so be you’ve business wi’ her. Or mebbe I’ll do as well?” 

“Thanks,” I said. “I want to order some milk. Perhaps 
I had better arrange it with your wife?” 

“Aye,” said the man. “ She minds all that. Good day 
t’ye, Master—and to your bonnie childer, as well!” And 
he trudged on. 

“He should have said ‘child’ , not ’childer’ ,” said Bruno. 
“Sylvie's not a childer !” 

“He meant both of us,” said Sylvie. 

“No, he didn’t!” Bruno persisted. “ ’cause he said 
‘bonnie’, oo know!” 

“Well, at any rate he looked at us both,” Sylvie main¬ 
tained. 

"Well, then he must have seen we’re not both bonnie!” 



THE DOG-KING 


501 

Bruno retorted. “A -course I’m much uglier than 00! 
Didn’t he mean Sylvie, Mister Sir?” he shouted over his 
shoulder, as he ran off. 

But there was no use in replying, as he had already 
vanished round the bend of the road. When we overtook 
him he was climbing a gate, and was gazing earnestly 
into the field, where a horse, a cow, and a kid were brows¬ 
ing amicably together. “For its father, a Horse” he 
murmured to himself. “For its mother, a Cow. For their 
dear little child, a little Goat, is the most curiousest thing 
I ever seen in my world!” 

“Bruno’s World!” I pondered. “Yes, I suppose every 
child has a world of his own—and every man, too, for the 
matter of that. I wonder if that’s the cause for all the mis¬ 
understanding there is in Life?” 

“That must be Hunter’s farm!” said Sylvie, pointing to 
a house on the brow of the hill, led up to by a cart-road. 
“There’s no other farm in sight, this way; and you said 
we must be nearly there by this time.” 

I had thought it, while Bruno was climbing the gate, 
but I couldn't remember having said it. However, Sylvie 
was evidently in the right. “Get down, Bruno,” I said, 
"and open the gate for us.” 

“It's a good thing we’s with 00, isn’t it, Mister Sir?” 
said Bruno, as we entered the field. "That big dog might 
have bited 00, if oo’d been alone! Oo needn’t be flightened 
of it!” he whispered, clinging tight to my hand to en¬ 
courage me. "It aren’t fierce!” 

“Fierce!” Sylvie scornfully echoed, as the dog—a mag¬ 
nificent Newfoundland—that had come galloping down 
the field to meet us, began curveting round us, in gambols 
full of graceful beauty, and welcoming us with short 
joyful barks. “Fierce! Why, it’s as gentle as a lamb! It’s— 
why, Bruno, don’t you know? It’s-” 

“So it are\” cried Bruno, rushing forwards and throw¬ 
ing his arms round its neck. "Oh, you dear dog!” And it 
seemed as if the two children would never have done 
hugging and stroking it. 



502 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“And how ever did he get here}” said Bruno. “Ask 
him, Sylvie. I doosn’t know how.” 

And then began an eager talk in Doggee, which of 
course was lost upon me ; and I could only guess, when 
the beautiful creature, with a sly glance at me, whispered 
something in Sylvie’s ear, that / was now the subject of 
conversation. Sylvie looked round laughingly. 

“He asked me who you are,” she explained. “And I 
said ‘He’s our friend’. And he said ‘What’s’his name?’ 
And I said ‘It’s Mister Sir’. And he said ‘Bosh!’ ” 

“What is ‘Bosh!’ in Doggee,” I enquired. 

“It’s the same as in English,” said Sylvie. “Only, when 
a dog says it, it’s a sort of whisper, that’s half a cough and 
half a bark. Nero, say ‘Bosh!’ ” 

And Nero, who had now begun gamboling round us 
again, said “Bosh!” several times; and I found that Syl¬ 
vie’s description of the sound was perfectly accurate. 

“I wonder what’s behind this long wall?” I said, as we 
walked on. 

“It’s the Orchard,” Sylvie replied, after a consultation 
with Nero. “See, there’s a boy getting down off the wall, 
at that far corner. And now he’s running away across the 
field. I do believe he’s been stealing the apples!” 

Bruno set off after him, but returned to us in a few 
moments, as he had evidently no chance of overtaking 
the young rascal. 

“I couldn’t catch him!” he said. “I wiss I'd started a 
little sooner. His pockets was full of apples!” 

The Dog-King looked up at Sylvie, and said something 
in Doggee. 

“Why, of course you can!” Sylvie exclaimed. “How 
stupid not to think of it! Nero’W hold him for us, Bruno! 
But I’d better make him invisible, first.” And she hastily 
got out the Magic Jewel, and began waving it over Nero’s 
head, and down along his back. 

“That’ll do!” cried Bruno, impatiently. “After him, 
good Doggie!” 

“Oh, Bruno!” Sylvie exclaimed reproachfully. “You 



THE DQG-KING 503 

shouldn’t have sent him off so quick! I hadn’t done the 
tail!” 

Meanwhile Nero was coursing like a greyhound down 
the field: so at least I concluded from all / could see of 
him—the long feathery tail, which floated like a meteor 
through the air—and in a very few seconds he had come 
up with the little thief. 

‘‘He’s got him safe, by one foot!” cried Sylvie, who was 
eagerly watching the chase. ‘‘Now there’s no hurry, 
Bruno!” 

So we walked, quite leisurely, down the field, to where 
the frightened lad stood. A more curious sight I had sel¬ 
dom seen, in all my "eerie” experiences. Every bit of him 
was in violent action, except the left foot, which was 
apparently glued to the ground—there being nothing 
visibly holding it: while, at some little distance, the long 
feathery tail was waving gracefully from side to side, 
showing that Nero, at least, regarded the whole affair as 
nothing but a magnificent game of play. 

"What’s the matter with you?” I said, as gravely as I 
could. 

"Got the crahmp in me ahnkle!” the thief groaned in 
reply. "An' me fut’s gone to sleep!” And he began to 
blubber aloud. 

"Now, look here!” Bruno said in a commanding tone, 
getting in front of him. "Oo’ve got to give up those 
apples!” 

The lad glanced at me, but didn’t seem to reckon my 
interference as worth anything. Then he glanced at Syl¬ 
vie: she clearly didn’t count for very much, either. Then 
he took courage. "It’ll take a better man than any of yer 
to get ’em!” he retorted defiantly. 

Sylvie stooped and patted the invisible Nero. "A little 
tighter!” she whispered. And a sharp yell from the ragged 
boy showed how promptly the Dog-King had taken the 
hint. 

"What’s the matter now?" I said. "Is your ankle 
worse?” 



504 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“And it’ll get worse, and worse, and worse,’’ Bruno 
solemnly assured him, “till oo gives up those apples!” 

Apparently the thief was convinced of this at last, and 
he sulkily began emptying his pockets of the apples. The 
children watched from a little distance, Bruno dancing 
with delight at every fresh yell extracted from Nero’s 
terrified prisoner. 

“That’s all,” the boy said at last. 

“It isn’t all!” cried Bruno. “There’s three more in that 
pocket!” 

Another hint from Sylvie to the Dog-King—another 
sharp yell from the thief, now convicted of lying also— 
and the remaining three apples were surrendered. 

“Let him go, please,” Sylvie said in Doggee, and the 
lad limped away at a great pace, stooping now and then 
to rub the ailing ankle in fear, seemingly, that the 
“crahmp” might attack it again. 

Bruno ran back, with his booty, to the orchard wall, 
and pitched the apples over it one b}' one. “I’s welly afraid 
some of them’s gone under the wrong trees!” he panted, 
on overtaking us again. 

“The wrong trees!” laughed Sylvie. “Trees ca’n’t do 
wrong! There’s no such things as wrong trees!” 

“Then there's no such things as right trees, neither!” 
cried Bruno. And Sylvie gave up the point. 

“Wait a minute, please!” she said to me. “I must make 
Nero visible, you know!” 

“No, please don’t!” cried Bruno, who had by this time 
mounted on the Royal back, and was twisting the Royal 
hair into a bridle. “It’ll be such fun to have him like 
this!” 

“Well, it does look funny,” Sylvie admitted, and led 
the way to the farm-house, where the farmer's wife stood, 
evidently much perplexed at the weird procession now 
approaching her. “It’s summat gone wrong wi’ my spec¬ 
tacles, I doubt!” she murmured, as she took them off, and 
began diligently rubbing them with a corner of her apron. 

Meanwhile Sylvie had hastily pulled Bruno down from 



MATILDA JANE 505 

his steed, and had just time to make His Majesty wholly 
visible before the spectacles were resumed. 

All was natural, now; but the good woman still looked 
a little uneasy about it. “My eyesight's getting bad," she 
said, “but I see you now, my darlings! You’ll give me a 
kiss, won’t you?" 

Bruno got behind me, in a moment: however Sylvie 
put up her face, to be kissed, as representative of both, 
and we all went in together. 


Chapter V 
Matilda Jane 

“Come to me, my little gentleman,” said our hostess, lift¬ 
ing Bruno into her lap, “and tell me everything.” 

“I ca’n’t,” said Bruno. “There wouldn't be time. Be¬ 
sides, I don’t know everything.” 

The good woman looked a little puzzled, and turned to 
Sylvie for help. “Does he like riding ?” she asked. 

“Yes, I think so,” Sylvie gently replied. “He’s just had 
a ride on Nero.” 

“Ah, Nero’s a grand dog, isn’t he? Were you ever out¬ 
side a horse, my little man?” 

“Always!” Bruno said with great decision. “Never was 
inside one. Was 00?” 

Here I thought it well to interpose, and to mention the 
business on which we had come, and so relieved her, for a 
few minutes, from Bruno's perplexing questions. 

“And those dear children will like a bit of cake, I'll war¬ 
rant ! ’ ’ said the farmer’s hospitable wife, when the business 
was concluded, as she opened her cupboard, and brought 
out a cake. “And don’t you waste the crust, little gentle¬ 
man!” she added, as she handed a good slice of it to 
Bruno. “You know what the poetry-book says about wil¬ 
ful waste?” 



506 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“No, I don’t,” said Bruno. “What doos he say about 
it?” 

“Tell him, Bessie!” And the mother looked down, 
proudly and lovingly, on a rosy little maiden, who had 
just crept shyly into the room, and was leaning against 
her knee. “What’s that your poetry-book says about wil¬ 
ful waste?” 

“For wilful waste makes woeful want,” Bessie recited, 
in an almost inaudible whisper: “and you may live to say 
‘How much I wish I had the crust that then I threw away!’ ” 

“Now try if you can say it, my dear! For wilful -” 

“For wifful —sumfinoruvver-” Bruno began, readily 

enough; and then there came a dead pause. “Ca’n't re¬ 
member no more! ’ ’ 

“Well, what do you learn from it, then? You can tell 
us that, at any rate?” 

Bruno ate a little more cake, and considered: but the 
moral did not seem to him to be a very obvious one. 

“Always to-” Sylvie prompted him in a whisper. 

“Always to-” Bruno softly repeated: and then, with 

sudden inspiration, “always to look where it goes to!” 

“Where what goes to, darling?” 

“Why the crust, a course!” said Bruno. “Then, if I lived 

to say ‘How much I wiss 1 had the crust -’ (and all that), 

I’d know where I frew it to!” 

This new interpretation quite puzzled the good woman. 
She returned to the subject of “Bessie”. "Wouldn’t you 
like to see Bessie’s doll, my dears! Bessie, take the little 
lady and gentleman to see Matilda Jane!” 

Bessie’s shyness thawed away in a moment. “Matilda 
Jane has just woke up,” she stated, confidentially, to Syl¬ 
vie. “Won’t you help me on with her frock? Them strings 
is such a bother to tie!” 

“I can tie strings,” we heard, in Sylvie’s gentle voice, as 
the two little girls left the room together. Bruno ignored 
the whole proceeding, and strolled to the window, quite 
with the air of a fashionable gentleman. Little girls, and 
dolls, were not at all in his line. 



MATILDA JANE $ 0 J 

And forthwith the fond mother proceeded to tell me (as 
what mother is not ready to do?) of all Bessie’s virtues 
(and vices too, for the matter of that) and of the many 
fearful maladies which, notwithstanding those ruddy 
cheeks and that plump little figure, had nearly, time and 
again, swept her from the face of the earth. 

When the full stream of loving memories had nearly 
run itself out, I began to question her about the working 
men of that neighbourhood, and specially the “Willie,” 
whom we had heard of at his cottage. “He was a good 
fellow once,” said my kind hostess: “but it’s the drink has 
ruined him! Not that I’d rob them of the drink—it’s good 
for the most of them—but there’s some as is too weak to 
stand agin’ temptations: it’s a thousand pities, for them, 
as they ever built the Golden Lion at the corner there!” 

“The Golden Lion?” I repeated. 

“It’s the new Public,” my hostess explained. “And it 
stands right in the way, and handy for the workmen, as 
they come back from the brickfields, as it might be to-day, 
with their week’s wages. A deal of money gets wasted that 
way. And some of ’em gets drunk.” 

“If only they could have it in their own houses-” 

I mused, hardly knowing I had said the words out loud. 

“That’s it!” she eagerly exclaimed. It was evidently a 
solution, of the problem, that she had already thought 
out. “If only you could manage, so’s each man to have his 
own little barrel in his own house—there’d hardly be a 
drunken man in the length and breadth of the land!” 

And then I told her the old story—about a certain cot¬ 
tager who bought himself a little barrel of beer, and in¬ 
stalled his wife as bar-keeper: and how, every time he 
wanted his mug of beer, he regularly paid her over the 
counter for it: and how she never would let him go on 
“tick”, and was a perfectly inflexible bar-keeper in never 
letting him have more than his proper allowance: and 
how, every time the barrel needed refilling, she had 
plenty to do it with, and something over for her money¬ 
box: and how, at the end of the year, he not only found 



508 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

himself in first-rate health and spirits, with that unde- 
finable but quite unmistakable air which always distin¬ 
guishes the sober man from the one who takes "a drop 
too much”, but had quite a box full of money, all saved 
out of his own pence! 

“If only they’d all do like that!” said the good woman, 
wiping her eyes, which were overflowing with kindly 
sympathy. “Drink hadn’t need to be the curse it is to 
some-” 

"Only a curse”, I said, “when it is used wrongly. Any 
of God’s gifts may be turned into a curse, unless we use it 
wisely. But we must be getting home. Would you call the 
little girls? Matilda Jane has seen enough of company, 
for one day, I’m sure!” 

“I’ll find ’em in a minute,” said my hostess, as she rose 
to leave the room. “Maybe that young gentleman saw 
which way they went?” 

“Where are they, Bruno?” I said. 

“They ain't in the field,” was Bruno's rather evasive 
reply, “ ’cause there’s nothing but pigs there, and Sylvie 
isn’t a pig. Now don’t interrupt me any more, ’cause I’m 
telling a story to this fly; and it wo’n't attend!” 

"They’re among the apples, I’ll warrant ’em!” said the 
Farmer’s wife. So we left Bruno to finish his story, and 
went out into the orchard, where we soon came upon the 
children, walking sedately side by side, Sylvie carrying 
the doll, while little Bess carefully shaded its face, with a 
large cabbage-leaf for a parasol. 

As soon as they caught sight of us, little Bess dropped 
her cabbage-leaf and came running to meet us, Sylvie 
following more slowly, as her precious charge evidently 
needed great care and attention. 

“I’m its Mamma, and Sylvie’s the Head-Nurse,” Bessie 
explained: "and Sylvie’s taught me ever such a pretty 
song, for me to sing to Matilda Jane!” 

“Let’s hear it once more, Sylvie,” I said, delighted at 
getting the chance I had long wished for, of hearing her 
sing. But Sylvie turned shy and frightened in a moment. 



MATILDA JANE 509 

"No, please not\” she said, in an earnest “aside” to me. 
"Bessie knows it quite perfect now. Bessie can sing it!” 

"Aye, aye! Let Bessie sing it!” said the proud mother. 
“Bessie has a bonny voice of her own,” (this again was an 
“aside” to me) "though I say it as shouldn’t!” 

Bessie was only too happy to accept the "encore”. So 
the plump little Mamma sat down at our feet, with her 
hideous daughter reclining stiffly across her lap (it was 
one of a kind that wo’n’t sit down, under any amount of 
persuasion), and, with a face simply beaming with delight, 
began the lullaby, in a shout that ought to have frightened 
the poor baby into fits. The Head-Nurse crouched down 
behind her, keeping herself respectfully in the back¬ 
ground, with her hands on the shoulders of her little 
mistress, so as to be ready to act as Prompter, if required, 
and to supply “each gap in faithless memory void”. 

The shout, with which she began, proved to be only a 
momentary effort. After a very few notes, Bessie toned 
down, and sang on in a small but very sweet voice. At 
first her great black eyes were fixed on her mother, but 
soon her gaze wandered upwards, among the apples, and 
she seemed to have quite forgotten that she had any other 
audience than her Baby, and her Head-Nurse, who once 
or twice supplied, almost inaudibly, the right note, when 
the singer was getting a little "flat”. 

“Matilda Jane, you never look 
A t any toy or picture-book: 

I show you pretty things in vain — 

You must be blind, Matilda Jane! 

“I ask you riddles, tell you tales, 

But all our conversation fails: 

You never answer me again — 

I fear you’re dumb, Matilda Jane! 

“Matilda, darling, when I call. 

You never seem to hear at all: 

I shout with all my might and main — 

But you’re so deaf, Matilda Jane! 



510 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“Matilda Jane, you needn’t mind: 

For, though you’re deaf, and dumb, and blind, 

There’s some one loves you, it is plain — 

And that is me, Matilda Jane!” 

She sang three of the verses in a rather perfunctory 
style, but the last stanza evidently excited the little maid¬ 
en. Her voice rose, ever clearer and louder: she had a rapt 
look on her face, as if suddenly inspired, and, as she sang 
the last few words, she clasped to her heart the inattentive 
Matilda Jane. 

“Kiss it now!" prompted the Head-Nurse. And in a 
moment the simpering meaningless face of the Baby was 
covered with a shower of passionate kisses. 

“What a bonny song!” cried the Farmer’s wife. “Who 
made the words, dearie?” 

‘I—I think I’ll look for Bruno,” Sylvie said demurely, 
and left us hastily. The curious child seemed always afraid 
of being praised, or even noticed. 

“Sylvie planned the words,” Bessie informed us, proud 
of her superior information: “and Bruno planned the 
music—and I sang it!” (this last circumstance, by the 
way, we did not need to be told). 

So we followed Sylvie, and all entered the parlour to¬ 
gether. Bruno was still standing at the window, with his 
elbows on the sill. He had, apparently, finished the story 
that he was telling to the fly, and had found a new occu¬ 
pation. “Don’t imperrupt!” he said as we came in. “I’m 
counting the Pigs in the field!” 

“How many are there?” I enquired. 

“About a thousand and four,” said Bruno. 

“You mean ‘about a thousand’,” Sylvie corrected him. 
“There’s no good saying ‘and Jour’: you can’t be sure 
about the four!” 

“And you’re as wrong as ever!” Bruno exclaimed tri¬ 
umphantly. “It’s just the four I can be sure about; ’cause 
they’re here, grabbling under the window! It’s the thou¬ 
sand I isn’t prufiickly sure about!” 



MATILDA JANE 511 

% 

“But some of them have gone into the sty,” Sylvie said, 
leaning over him to look out of the window. 

“Yes,” said Bruno; “but they went so slowly and so 
fewly, I didn’t care to count them” 

“We must be going, children,” I said. “Wish Bessie 
good-bye.” Sylvie flung her arms round the little maiden’s 
neck, and kissed her: but Bruno stood aloof, looking un¬ 
usually shy. (“I never kiss nobody but Sylvie!” he ex¬ 
plained to me afterwards.) The Farmer's wife showed us 
out: and we were soon on our way back to Elveston. 

“And that’s the new public-house that we were talking 
about, I suppose?” I said, as we came in sight of a long 
low building, with the words “The Golden Lion” over 
the door. 

“Yes, that’s it,” said Sylvie. “I wonder if her Willie’s 
inside? Run in, Bruno, and see if he’s there.” 

I interposed, feeling that Bruno was, in a sort of way, 
in my care. “That’s not a place to send a child into.” For 
already the revellers were getting noisy: and a wild dis¬ 
cord of singing, shouting, and meaningless laughter came 
to us through the open windows. 

“They wo’n’t see him, you know,” Sylvie explained. 
“Wait a minute, Bruno!” She clasped the jewel, that al¬ 
ways hung round her neck, between the palms of her 
hands, and muttered a few words to herself. What they 
were I could not at all make out, but some mysterious 
change seemed instantly to pass over us. My feet seemed 
to me no longer to press the ground, and the dream-like 
feeling came upon me, that I was suddenly endowed with 
the power of floating in the air. I could still just see the 
children: but their forms were shadowy and unsubstantial, 
and their voices sounded as if they came from some distant 
place and time, they were so unreal. However, I offered 
no-further opposition to Bruno’s going into the house. He 
was back again in a few moments. “No, he isn’t come yet,” 
he said. “They’re talking about him inside, and saying 
how drunk he was last week.” 

While he was speaking, one of the men lounged out 



512 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

through the door, a pipe in one hand and a mug of beer 
in the other, and crossed to where we were standing, so 
as to get a better view along the road. Two or three others 
leaned out through the open window, each holding his 
mug of beer, with red faces and sleepy eyes. “Canst see 
him, lad?" one of them asked. 

"I dunnot know,” the man said, taking a step forwards, 
which brought us nearly face to face. Sylvie hastily pulled 
me out of his way. "Thanks, child,” I said. "I had forgot¬ 
ten he couldn’t see us. What would have happened if I 
had stayed in his way?” 

"I don't know,” Sylvie said gravely. "It wouldn’t 
matter to us\ but you may be different.” She said this in 
her usual voice, but the man took no sort of notice, though 
she was standing close in front of him, and looking up 
into his face as she spoke. 

"He’s coming now!” cried Bruno, pointing down the 
road. 

"He be a-coomin noo!” echoed the man, stretching out 
his arm exactly over Bruno’s head, and pointing with his 
pipe. 

"Then chorus agin!” was shouted out by one of the red¬ 
faced men in the window: and forthwith a dozen voices 
yelled, to a harsh discordant melody, the refrain: 

"There’s him, an’ yo', an’ me. 

Roarin’ laddies! 

We loves a bit o’ spree, 

Roarin’ laddies we, 

Roarin’ laddies 
Roarin’ laddies!" 

The man lounged back again to the house, joining lust¬ 
ily in the chorus as he went: so that only the children and 
I were in the road when "Willie” came up. 



Chapter VI 


Willie’s Wife 

He made for the door of the public-house, but the chil¬ 
dren intercepted him. Sylvie clung to one arm; while 
Bruno, on the opposite side, was pushing him with all his 
strength, and many inarticulate cries of “Gee-up! Gee- 
back! Woah then!” which he had picked up from the 
waggoners. 

“Willie” took not the least notice of them: he was sim¬ 
ply conscious that something had checked him: and, for 
want of any other way of accounting for it, he seemed to 
regard it as his own act. 

“I wunnut coom in,” he said: “not to-day.” 

“A mug o’ beer wunnut hurt ’ee!” his friends shouted 
in chorus. “Two mugs wunnut hurt ’ee! Nor a dozen 
mugs!” 

“Nay,” said Willie. "I’m agoan whoam.” 

“What, withouten thy drink, Willie man?” shouted the 
others. But “Willie man” would have no more discussion, 
and turned doggedly away, the children keeping one on 
each side of him, to guard him against any change in his 
sudden resolution. 

For a while he walked on stoutly enough, keeping his 
hands in his pockets, and softly whistling a tune, in time 
to his heavy tread: his success, in appearing entirely at his 
ease, was almost complete; but a careful observer would 
have noted that he had forgotten the second part of the 
air, and that, when it broke down, he instantly began it 
again, being too nervous to think of another, and too rest¬ 
less to endure silence. 

It was not the old fear that possessed him now—the old 
fear that had been his dreary companion every Saturday 
night he could remember as he had reeled along, steady¬ 
ing himself against gates and garden-palings, and when 
the shrill reproaches of his wife had seemed to his dazed 
brain only the echo of a yet more piercing voice within 

5*3 



514 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

the intolerable wail of a hopeless remorse: it was a wholly 
new fear that had come to him now: life had taken on 
itself a new set of colours, and was lighted up with a new 
and dazzling radiance, and he did not see, as yet, how 
his home-life, and his wife and child, would fit into the 
new order of things: the very novelty of it all was, to his 
simple mind, a perplexity and an overwhelming terror. 

And now the tune died into sudden silence on the 
trembling lips, as he turned a sharp corner, and came in 
sight of his own cottage, where his wife stood, leaning 
with folded arms on the wicket-gate, and looking up the 
road with a pale face, that had in it no glimmer of the 
light of hope—only the heavy shadow of a deep stony 
despair. 

“Fine an’ early, lad! Fine an’ early!” the words might 
have been words of welcoming, but oh, the bitterness of 
the tone in which she said it! “What brings thee from thy 
merry mates, and all the fiddling and the jigging? Pock¬ 
ets empty, I doubt? Or thou’st come, mebbe, for to see thy 
little one die? The bairnie’s clemmed, and I’ve nor bite 
nor sup to gie her. But what does thou care?” She flung 
the gate open, and met him with blazing eyes of fury. 

The man said no word. Slowly, and with downcast 
eyes, he passed into the house, while she, half terrified at 
his strange silence, followed him in without another 
word; and it was not till he had sunk into a chair, with 
his arms crossed on the table and with drooping head, that 
she found her voice again. 

It seemed entirely natural for us to go in with them: at 
another time one would have asked leave for this, but I 
felt, I knew not why, that we were in some mysterious 
way invisible, and as free to come and to go as disem¬ 
bodied spirits. 

The child in the cradle woke up, and raised a piteous 
cry, which in a moment brought the children to its side: 
Bruno rocked the cradle, while Sylvie tenderly replaced 
the little head on the pillow from which it had slipped. 
But the mother took no heed of the cry, nor yet of the 



WILLIE’S WIFE 


515 

satisfied "coo” that it set up when Sylvie had made it 
happy again: she only stood gazing at her husband, and 
vainly trying, with white quivering lips (I believe she 
thought he was mad), to speak in the old tones of shrill 
upbraiding that he knew so well. 

"And thou’st spent all thy wages—I'll swear thou hast 
—on the devil’s own drink—and thou’st been and made 
thysen a beast again—as thou alius dost—” 

"Hasna!” the man muttered, his voice hardly rising 
above a whisper, as he slowly emptied his pockets on the 
table. "There’s th’ wage, Missus, every penny on’t.” 

The woman gasped and put one hand to her heart, as if 
under some great shock of surprise. "Then how’s thee got¬ 
ten th’ drink?” 

“Hasna gotten it,” he answered her, in a tone more sad 
than sullen. "I hanna touched a drop this blessed day. 
No!” he cried aloud, bringing his clenched fist heavily 
down upon the table, and looking up at her with gleam¬ 
ing eyes, "nor I’ll never touch another drop o’ the cursed 
drink—till I die—so help me God my Maker!” His voice, 
which had suddenly risen to a hoarse shout, dropped 
again as suddenly: and once more he bowed his head, and 
buried his face in his folded arms. 

The woman had dropped upon her knees by the cradle, 
while he was speaking. She neither looked at him nor- 
seemed to hear him. With hands clasped above her head, 
she rocked herself wildly to and fro. "Oh my God! Oh my 
God!” was all she said, over and over again. 

Sylvie and Bruno gently unclasped her hands and drew 
them down—till she had an arm round each of them, 
though she took no notice of them, but knelt on with eyes 
gazing upwards, and lips that moved as if in silent thanks¬ 
giving. The man kept his face hidden, and uttered no 
sound: but one could see the sobs that shook him from 
head to foot. 

After a while he raised his head—his face all wet with 
tears. "Polly!” he said softly; and then, louder, "Old 
Poll!” 



516 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

Then she rose from her knees and came to him, with a 
dazed look, as if she were walking in her sleep. “Who 
was it called me old Poll?” she asked: her voice took on 
it a tender playfulness: her eyes sparkled; and the rosy 
light of Youth flushed her pale cheeks, till she looked 
more like a happy girl of seventeen than a worn woman 
of forty. “Was that my own lad, my Willie, a-waiting for 
me at the stile?” 

His face too was transformed, in the same magic light, 
to the likeness of a bashful boy: and boy and girl they 
seemed, as he wound an arm about her, and drew her to 
his side, while with the other hand he thrust from him the 
heap of money, as though it were something hateful to 
the touch. “Tak it, lass,” he said, “tak it all! An’ fetch 
us summat to eat: but get a sup o’ milk, first, for t’ 
bairn.” 

“My little bairn!” she murmured as she gathered up the 
coins. “My own little lassie!” Then she moved to the door, 
and was passing out, but a sudden thought seemed to 
arrest her: she hastily returned—first to kneel down and 
kiss the sleeping child, and then to throw herself into her 
husband’s arms and be strained to his heart. The next 
moment she was on her way, taking with her a jug that 
hung on a peg near the door: we followed close behind. 

We had not gone far before we came in sight of a 
swinging sign-board bearing the word “dairy” on it, and 
here she went in, welcomed by a little curly white dog, 
who, not being under the “eerie” influence, saw the chil¬ 
dren, and received them with the most effusive affection. 
When I got inside, the dairyman was in the act of taking 
the money. “Is't for thysen. Missus, or for t' bairn?” he 
asked, when he had filled the jug, pausing with it in his 
hand. 

“For t’ bairnl” she said, almost reproachfully. “Think’st 
tha I’d touch a drop mysen, while as she hadna got her 
fill?” 

“All right, Missus,” the man replied, turning away with 
the jug in his hand. “Let’s just mak sure it’s good meas- 



WILLIE’S WIFE 


517 

ure.” He went back among his shelves of milk-bowls, care¬ 
fully keeping his back towards her while he emptied a 
little measure of cream into the jug, muttering to himself 
"mebbe it'll hearten her up a bit, the little lassie!” 

The woman never noticed the kind deed, but took back 
the jug with a simple “Good evening, Master,” and went 
her way: but the children had been more observant, and, 
as we followed her out, Bruno remarked “That were 
welly kind: and I loves that man: and if I was welly rich 
I’d give him a hundred pounds—and a bun. That little 
grummeling dog doosn’t know its business!” He referred 
to the dairyman’s little dog, who had apparently quite 
forgotten the affectionate welcome he had given us on 
our arrival, and was now following at a respectful dis¬ 
tance, doing his best to “speed the parting guest” with a 
shower of little shrill barks, that seemed to tread on one 
another’s heels. 

“What is a dog’s business?” laughed Sylvie. "Dogs 
ca’n’t keep shops and give change!” 

“Sisters’ businesses isn’t to laugh at their brothers,” 
Bruno replied with perfect gravity. “And dogs’ businesses 
is to bark —not like that: it should finish one bark before 
it begins another: and it should—Oh Sylvie, there's some 
dindledums!” 

And in another moment the happy children were flying 
across the common, racing for the patch of dandelions. 

While I stood watching them, a strange dreamy feeling 
came upon me: a railway-platform seemed to take the 
place of the green swafd, and, instead of the light figure 
of Sylvie bounding along, I seemed to see the flying form 
of Lady Muriel; but whether Bruno had also undergone 
a transformation, and had become the old man whom she 
was running to overtake, I was unable to judge, so in¬ 
stantaneously did the feeling come and go. 

When I re-entered the little sitting-room which I shared 
with Arthur, he was standing with his back to me, look¬ 
ing out of the open window, and evidently had not heard 
me enter. A cup of tea, apparently just tasted and pushed 



5l8 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

aside, stood on the table, on the opposite side of which was 
a letter, just begun, with the pen lying across it: an open 
book lay on the sofa: the London paper occupied the easy 
chair; and on the little table which stood by it, I noticed 
an unlighted cigar and an open box of cigar-lights: all 
things betokened that the Doctor, usually so methodical 
and so self-contained, had been trying every form of 
occupation, and could settle to none! 

“This is very unlike you, Doctor!” I was beginning, but 
checked myself, as he turned at the sound of my voice, in 
sheer amazement at the wonderful change that had taken 
place in his appearance. Never had I seen a face so radiant 
with happiness, or eyes that sparkled with such unearthly 
light! “Even thus”, I thought, “must the herald-angel 
have looked, who brought to the shepherds, watching 
over their flocks by night, that sweet message of 'peace 
on earth, good-will to men l” 

“Yes, dear friend!” he said, as if in answer to the ques¬ 
tion that I suppose he read in my face. “It is true! It is 
true!” 

No need to ask what was true. “God bless you both!” I 
said, as I felt the happy tears brimming to my eyes. “You 
were made for each other!” 

“Yes,” he said, simply, “I believe we were. And what 
a change it makes in one’s Life! This isn’t the same 
world! That isn’t the sky I saw yesterday! Those clouds— 
I never saw such clouds in all my life before! They look 
like troops of hovering angels!” 

To me they looked very ordinary clouds indeed: but 
then I had not fed "on honey dew, And drunk the milk of 
Paradise ”! 

“She wants to see you—at once,” he continued, de¬ 
scending suddenly to the things of earth. “She says that is 
the one drop yet wanting in her cup of happiness!” 

“I’ll go at once,” I said, as I turned to leave the room. 
"Wo'n't you come with me?” 

“No, Sir!” said the Doctor, with a sudden effort— 
which proved an utter failure—to resume his professional 



MEIN HERR 519 

manner. “Do I look like coming with you? Have you 

never heard that two is company, and-” 

“Yes,” I said, "I have heard it: and I’m painfully aware 
that I am Number Three\ But, when shall we three meet 
again?” 

“When the hurly-burly’s done!” he answered with a 
happy laugh, such as I had not heard from him for many 
a year. 


Chapter VII 
Mein Herr 

Sol went on my lonely way, and, on reaching the Hall, I 
found Lady Muriel standing at the garden-gate waiting 
for me. 

“No need to give you joy, or to wish you joy?” I began. 

“None whatever !” she replied, with the joyous laugh of 
a child. “We give people what they haven’t got: we wish 
for something that is yet to come. For me, it’s all here \ It’s 
all mine\ Dear friend,” she suddenly broke off, “do you 
think Heaven ever begins on Earth, for any of us?” 

“For some,” I said. “For some, perhaps, who are simple 
and childlike. You know he said ‘of such is the Kingdom 
of Heaven’.” 

Lady Muriel clasped her hands, and gazed up into the 
cloudless sky, with a look I had often seen in Sylvie’s eyes. 
“I feel as if it had begun for me,” she almost whispered. 
“I feel as if / were one of the happy children, whom He 
bid them bring near to Him, though the people would 
have kept them back. Yes, He has seen me in the throng. 
He has read the wistful longing in my eyes. He has beck¬ 
oned me to Him. They have had to make way for me. 
He has taken me up in His arms. He has put His hands 
upon me and blessed me!” She paused, breathless in her 
perfect happiness. 



520 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“Yes,” I said. “I think He has!” 

“You must come and speak to my father,” she went on, 
as we stood side by side at the gate, looking down the 
shady lane. But, even as she said the words, the “eerie” 
sensation came over me like a flood: I saw the dear old 
Professor approaching us, and also saw, what was stranger 
still, that he was visible to Lady Muriell 

What was to be done? Had the fairy-life been merged 
in the real life? Or was Lady Muriel "eerie” also, and thus 
able to enter into the fairy-world along with me? The 
words were on my lips (“I see an old friend of mine in 
the lane: if you don’t know him, may I introduce him to 
you?”) when the strangest thing of all happened: Lady 
Muriel spoke. 

“I see an old friend of mine in the lane,” she said: "if 
you don’t know him, may I introduce him to you?” 

I seemed to wake out of a dream: for the “eerie” feeling 
was still strong upon me, and the figure outside seemed 
to be changing at every moment, like one of the shapes in 
a kaleidoscope: now he was the Professor, and now he 
was somebody else! By the time he had reached the gate, 
he certainly was somebody else: and I felt that the proper 
course was for Lady Muriel, not for me, to introduce him. 
She greeted him kindly, and, opening the gate, admitted 
the venerable old man—a German, obviously—who 
looked about him with dazed eyes, as if he, too, had but 
just awaked from a dream! 

No, it was certainly not the Professor! My old friend 
could not have grown that magnificent beard since last 
we met: moreover, he would have recognised me, for I 
was certain that I had not changed much in the time. 

As it was, he simply looked at me vaguely, and took 
off his hat in response to Lady Muriel’s words "Let me 
introduce Mein Herr to you”; while in the words, spoken 
in a strong German accent, "proud to make your ac¬ 
quaintance, Sir!” I could detect no trace of an idea that 
we had ever met before. 

Lady Muriel led us to the well-known shady nook, 



MEIN HERR 


521 

where preparations for afternoon-tea had already been 
made, and, while she went in to look for the Earl, we 
seated ourselves in two easy-chairs, and “Mein Herr” took 
up Lady Muriel’s work, and examined it through his 
large spectacles (one of the adjuncts that made him so 
provokingly like the Professor). “Hemming pocket-hand¬ 
kerchiefs?” he said, musingly. “So that is what the Eng¬ 
lish miladies occupy themselves with, is it?” 

“It is the one accomplishment”, I said, “in which Man 
has never yet rivalled Woman!” 

Here Lady Muriel returned with her father; and, after 
he had exchanged some friendly words with “Mein 
Herr”, and we had all been supplied with the needful 
“creature-comforts”, the newcomer returned to the sug¬ 
gestive subject of Pocket-handkerchiefs. 

“You have heard of Fortunatus’s Purse, Miladi? Ah, 
so! Would you be surprised to hear that, with three of 
these leetle handkerchiefs, you shall make the Purse of 
Fortunatus, quite soon, quite easily?” 

“Shall I indeed?” Lady Muriel eagerly replied, as she 
took a heap of them into her lap, and threaded her 
needle. “Please tell me how, Mein Herr! I’ll make one be¬ 
fore I touch another drop of tea!” 

“You shall first,” said Mein Herr, possessing himself of 
two of the handkerchiefs, spreading one upon the other, 
and holding them up by two corners, “you shall first join 
together these upper corners, the right to the right, the 
left to the left; and the opening between them shall be the 
mouth of the Purse.” 

A very few stitches sufficed to carry out this direction. 
“Now, if I sew the other three edges together”, she sug¬ 
gested, "the bag is complete?” 

“Not so, Miladi: the lower edges shall first be joined— 
ah, not so!” (as she was beginning to sew them together). 
“Turn one of them over, and join the right lower corner 
of the one to the left lower corner of the other, and sew 
the lower edges together in what you would call the wrong 
way .” 



522 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

"I see!" said Lady Muriel, as she deftly executed the 
order. "And a very twisted, uncomfortable, uncanny- 
looking bag it makes! But the moral is a lovely one. Un¬ 
limited wealth can only be attained by doing things in 
the wrong way! And how are we to join up these mys¬ 
terious—no, I mean this mysterious opening?” (twisting 
the thing round and round with a puzzled air). "Yes, it 
is one opening. I thought it was two, at first.” 

"You have seen the puzzle of the Paper Ring?” Mein 
Herr said, addressing the Earl. "Where you take a slip of 
paper, and join its ends together, first twisting one, so as 
to join the upper corner of one end to the lower corner of 
the other ?” 

"I saw one made, only yesterday,” the Earl replied. 
"Muriel, my child, were you not making one, to amuse 
those children you had to tea?” 

"Yes, I know that Puzzle,” said Lady Muriel. "The 
Ring has only one surface, and only one edge, It’s very 
mysterious!” 

"The hag is just like that, isn’t it?” I suggested. “Is not 
the outer surface of one side of it continuous with the 
inner surface of the other side?” 

"So it is!” she exclaimed. “Only it isn’t a bag, just yet. 
How shall we fill up this opening. Mein Herr?” 

“Thus!” said the old man impressively, taking the bag 
from her, and rising to his feet in the excitement of the 
explanation. "The edge of the opening consists of four 
handkerchief edges, and you can trace it continuously, 
round and round the opening: down the right edge of 
one handkerchief, up the left edge of the other, and then 
down the left edge of the one, and up the right edge of 
the other!” 

“So you can!” Lady Muriel murmured thoughtfully, 
leaning her head on her hand, and earnestly watching the 
old man. "And that proves it to be only one opening!” 

She looked so strangely like a child, puzzling over a 
difficult lesson, and Mein Herr had become, for the mo¬ 
ment, so strangely like the old Professor, that I felt utter- 



MEIN HERR 


523 

ly bewildered: the “eerie” feeling was on me in its full 
force, and I felt almost impelled to say “Do you under¬ 
stand it, Sylvie?” However I checked myself by a great 
effort, and let the dream (if indeed it was a dream) go on 
to its end. 

“Now, this third handkerchief”, Mein Herr proceeded, 
“has also four edges, which you can trace continuously 
round and round: all you need do is to join its four edges 
to the four edges of the opening. The Purse is then com¬ 
plete, and its outer surface-” 

"I see!” Lady Muriel eagerly interrupted. “Its outer 
surface will be continuous with its inner surface! But it 
will take time. I’ll sew it up after tea.” She laid aside the 
bag, and resumed her cup of tea. “But why do you call it 
Fortunatus’s Purse, Mein Herr?” 

The dear old man beamed upon her, with a jolly smile, 
looking more exactly like the Professor than ever. “Don’t 
you see, my child—I should say Miladi ? Whatever is in¬ 
side that Purse, is outside it; and whatever is outside it, is 
inside it. So you have all the wealth of the world in that 
leetle Purse!” 

His pupil clapped her hands, in unrestrained delight. 
“I’ll certainly sew the third handkerchief in— some time,” 
she said: “but I wo’n’t take up your time by trying it now. 
Tell us some more wonderful things, please!” And her 
face and her voice so exactly recalled Sylvie, that I could 
not help glancing round, half-expecting to see Bruno 
also! 

Mein Herr began thoughtfully balancing his spoon on 
the edge of his teacup, while he pondered over this re¬ 
quest. “Something wonderful—like Fortunatus's Purse? 
That will give you—when it is made—wealth beyond 
your wildest dreams: but it will not give you Timel” 

A pause of silence ensued—utilized by Lady Muriel for 
the very practical purpose of refilling the teacups. 

“In your country”, Mein Herr began with a startling 
abruptness, “what becomes of all the wasted Time?” 

Lady Muriel looked grave. “Who can tell?” she half- 



524 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

whispered to herself. “All one knows is that it is gone— 
past recall!’’ 

“Well, in my— I mean in a country 7 have visited”, said 
the old man, "they store it up: and it comes in very useful, 
years afterwards! For example, suppose you have a long 
tedious evening before you: nobody to talk to: nothing 
you care to do: and yet hours too soon to go to bed. How 
do you behave then?” 

“I get very cross,” she frankly admitted: “and I want 
to throw things about the room!” 

“When that happens to—to the people I have visited, 
they never act so. By a short and simple process—which I 
cannot explain to you—they store up the useless hours: 
and, on some other occasion, when they happen to need 
extra time, they get them out again.” 

The Earl was listening with a slightly incredulous 
smile. “Why cannot you explain the process?” he en¬ 
quired. 

Mein Herr was ready with a quite unanswerable reason. 
“Because you have no words, in your language, to convey 
the ideas which are needed. I could explain it in—in— 
but you would not understand it!” 

"No indeed!” said Lady Muriel, graciously dispensing 
with the name of the unknown language. “I never learnt 
it—at least, not to speak it fluently, you know. Please tell 
us some more wonderful things!” 

“They run their railway-trains without any engines— 
nothing is needed but machinery to stop them with. Is 
that wonderful enough, Miladi?” 

“But where does the force come from?” I ventured to 
ask. 

Mein Herr turned quickly round, to look at the new 
speaker. Then he took off his spectacles, and polished 
them, and looked at me again, in evident bewilderment. I 
could see he was thinking—as indeed I was also—that we 
must have met before. 

"They use the force of gravity ,” he said. “It is a force 
known also in your country, I believe?” 



MEIN HERR 


525 

“But that would need a railway going down-hill the 
Earl remarked. “You ca’n’t have all your railways going 
down-hill?’’ 

“They all do’’, said Mein Herr. 

“Not from both ends?” 

“From both ends.” 

“Then I give it up!” said the Earl. 

“Can you explain the process?” said Lady Muriel. 
“Without using that language, that I ca’n’t speak flu¬ 
ently?” 

“Easily,” said Mein Herr. “Each railway is in a long 
tunnel, perfectly straight: so of course the middle of it is 
nearer the centre of the globe than the two ends: so every 
train runs half-way down-hi\\, and that gives it force 
enough to run the other half up- hill.” 

“Thank you. I understand that perfectly,” said Lady 
Muriel. “But the velocity, in the middle of the tunnel, 
must be something fearfulV’ 

Mein Herr was evidently much gratified at the intelli¬ 
gent interest Lady Muriel took in his remarks. At every 
moment the old man seemed to grow more chatty and 
more fluent. “You would like to know our methods of 
driving ?” he smilingly enquired. “To us, a run-away 
horse is of no import at all!” 

Lady Muriel slightly shuddered. “To us it is a very real 
danger,” she said. 

“That is because your carriage is wholly behind your 
horse. Your horse runs. Your carriage follows. Perhaps 
your horse has the bit in his teeth. Who shall stop him? 
You fly, ever faster and faster! Finally comes the in¬ 
evitable upset!” 

"But suppose your horse manages to get the bit in his 
teeth?” 

“No matter! We would not concern ourselves. Our 
horse is harnessed in the very centre of our carriage. Two 
wheels are in front of him, and two behind. To the roof 
is attached one end of a broad belt. This goes under the 
horse’s body, and the other end is attached to a leetle— 



526 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

what you call a 'windlass’, I think. The horse takes the 
bit in his teeth. He runs away. We are flying at ten miles 
an hour! We turn our little windlass, five turns, six turns, 
seven turns, and—poof! Our horse is off the ground! Now 
let him gallop in the air as much as he pleases: our car¬ 
riage stands still. We sit round him, and watch him till he 
is tried. Then we let him down. Our horse is glad, very 
much glad, when his feet once more touch the ground!” 

“Capital!” said the Earl, who had been listening atten¬ 
tively. “Are there any other peculiarities in your car¬ 
riages?” 

“In the wheels, sometimes, my Lord. For your health, 
you go to sea: to be pitched, to be rolled, occasionally to be 
drowned. We do all that on land: we are pitched, as you: 
we are rolled, as you; but drowned, no! There is no 
water!” 

“What are the wheels like, then?” 

“They are oval, my Lord. Therefore the carriages rise 
and fall.” 

“Yes, and pitch the carriage backwards and forwards: 
but how do they make it roll?” 

“They do not match, my Lord. The end of one wheel 
answers to the side of the opposite wheel. So first one side 
of the carriage rises, then the other. And it pitches all the 
while. Ah, you must be a good sailor, to drive in our 
boat-carriages!” 

“I can easily believe it,” said the Earl. 

Mein Herr rose to his feet. “I must leave you now, Mi- 
ladi,” he said, consulting his watch. “I have another en¬ 
gagement.” 

“I only wish we had stored up some extra time!” Lady 
Muriel said, as she shook hands with him. “Then we 
could have kept you a little longer!” 

“In that case I would gladly stay,” replied Mein Herr. 
“As it is—I fear I must say goodbye!” 

“Where did you first meet him?” I asked Lady Muriel, 
when Mein Herr had left us. “And where does he live? 
And what is his real name?” 



IN A SHADY PLACE 527 

“We first—met—him-” she musingly replied, 

“really, I ca’n’t remember where\ And I’ve no idea where 
he lives! And I never heard any other name! It’s very 
curious. It never occurred to me before to consider what 
a mystery he is!” 

“I hope we shall meet again,” I said: "he interests me 
very much.” 

"He will be at our farewell-party, this day fortnight,” 
said the Earl. “Of course you will come? Muriel is anxious 
to gather all our friends around us once more, before we 
leave the place.” 

And then he explained to me—as Lady Muriel had left 
us together—that he was so anxious to get his daughter 
away from a place full of so many painful memories con¬ 
nected with the now-cancelled engagement with Major 
Lindon, that they had arranged to have the wedding in a 
month’s time, after which Arthur and his wife were to go 
on a foreign tour. 

"Don’t forget Tuesday week!” lie said as we shook 
hands at parting. “I only wish you could bring with you 
those charming children, that you introduced to us in the 
summer. Talk of the mystery of Mein Herr! That’s nothing 
to the mystery that seems to attend theml I shall never 
forget those marvellous flowers!” 

“I will bring them if I possibly can,” I said. But how to 
fulfil such a promise, I mused to myself on my way back 
to our lodgings, was a problem entirely beyond my skill! 


Chapter VIII 
In a Shady Place 

The ten days glided swiftly away: and, the day before the 
great party was to take place, Arthur proposed that we 
should stroll down to the Hall, in time for afternoon-tea. 



528 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“Hadn’t you better go aloneV' I suggested. “Surely 1 
shall be very much de tropl” 

“Well, it’ll be a kind of experiment,” he said. “ Fiat ex- 
perimentum in cor pore vili!” he added, with a graceful 
bow of mock politeness towards the unfortunate victim. 
“You see I shall have to bear the sight, to-morrow night, 
of my lady-love making herself agreeable to everybody 
except the right person, and I shall bear the agony all the 
better if we have a dress-rehearsal beforehand!’’ 

“My part in the play being, apparently, that of the 
sample wrong person?’’ 

“Well, no," Arthur said musingly, as we set forth: 
“there’s no such part in a regular company. ‘Heavy 
Father’? That wo'n’t do: that’s filled already. ‘Singing 
Chambermaid’? Well, the 'First Lady’ doubles that part. 
‘Comic Old Man’? You’re not comic enough. After all, 
I’m afraid there’s no part for you but the ‘Well-dressed 
Villain’: only”, with a critical side-glance, “I’m a leetle 
uncertain about the dress!” 

We found Lady Muriel alone, the Earl having gone out 
to make a call, and at once resumed old terms of intimacy, 
in the shady arbour where the tea-things seemed to be al¬ 
ways waiting. The only novelty in the arrangements (one 
which Lady Muriel seemed to regard as entirely a matter 
of course), was that two of the chairs were placed quite 
close together, side by side. Strange to say, / was not in¬ 
vited to occupy either of them! 

“We have been arranging, as we came along, about let¬ 
ter-writing,” Arthur began. “He will want to know how 
we’re enjoying our Swiss tour: and of course we must pre¬ 
tend we are!” 

“Of course,” she meekly assented. 

^‘And the skeleton-in-the-cupboard-” I suggested. 

"—is always a difficulty”, she quickly put in, "when 
you’re travelling about, and when there are no cupboards 
in the hotels. However, ours is a very portable one; and 
will be neatly packed, in a nice leather case-” 

“But please don't think about writing” , I said, “when 



IN A SHADY PLACE 529 

you’ve anything more attractive on hand. I delight in 
reading letters, but I know well how tiring it is to write 
them.” 

“It is, sometimes,” Arthur assented. “For instance, 
when you’re very shy of the person you have to write to.” 

“Does that show itself in the letter ?” Lady Muriel en¬ 
quired. “Of course, when I hear any one talking — you, for 
instance—I can see how desperately shy he is! But can 
you see that in a letter ? ” 

“Well, of course, when you hear any one talk fluently 
— you, for instance—you can see how desperately un-shy 
she is—not to say saucy! But the shyest and most inter¬ 
mittent talker must seem fluent in letter-writing. He may 
have taken half-an-hour to compose his second sentence; 
but there it is, close after the first!” 

“Then letters don’t express all that they might ex¬ 
press?” 

“That’s merely because our system of letter-writing is 
incomplete. A shy writer ought to be able to show that he 
is so. Why shouldn’t he make pauses in writing, just as he 
would do in speaking? He might leave blank spaces—say 
half a page at a time. And a very shy girl—if there is such 
a thing—might write a sentence on the first sheet of her 
letter—then put in a couple of blank sheets—then a sen¬ 
tence on the fourth sheet: and so on.” 

“I quite foresee that we —I mean this clever little boy 
and myself—” Lady Muriel said to me, evidently with the 
kind wish to bring me into the conversation, “—are going 
to become famous—of course all our inventions are com¬ 
mon property now—for a new Code of Rules for Letter¬ 
writing! Please invent some more, little boy!” 

“Well, another thing greatly needed, little girl, is some 
way of expressing that we don’t mean anything.” 

“Explain yourself, little boy! Surely you can find no 
difficulty in expressing a total absence of meaning?” 

“I mean that you should be able, when you don’t mean 
a thing to be taken seriously, to express that wish. For 
human nature is so constituted that whatever you write 

L.C. 


s 



530 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

seriously is taken as a joke, and whatever you mean as a 
joke is taken seriously! At any rate, it is so in writing to 
a ladyl” 

“Ah! you’re not used to writing to ladies!” Lady Muriel 
remarked, leaning back in her chair, and gazing thought¬ 
fully into the sky. “You should try.” 

“Very good,” said Arthur. “How many ladies may I 
begin writing to? As many as I can count on the fingers 
of both hands?” 

“As many as you can count on the thumbs of one hand!” 
his lady-love replied with much severity. “What a very 
naughty little boy he is! Isn’t he?” (with an appealing 
glance at me). 

"He’s a little fractious,” I said. “Perhaps he’s cutting a 
tooth.” While to myself I said “How exactly like Sylvie 
talking to Bruno!” 

“He wants his tea.” (The naughty little boy volunteered 
the information.) “He’s getting very tired, at the mere 
prospect of the great party to-morrow!” 

"Then he shall have a good rest before-hand!” she 
soothingly replied. “The tea isn’t made yet. Come, little 
boy, lean well back in your chair, and think about nothing 
—or about me, whichever you prefer!” 

“All the same, all the same!” Arthur sleepily mur¬ 
mured, watching her with loving eyes, as she moved her 
chair away to the tea table, and began to make the tea. 
“Then he’ll wait for his tea, like a good, patient little 
boy!” 

"Shall I bring you the London Papers?” said Lady 
Muriel. “I saw them lying on the table as I came out, 
but my father said there was nothing in them, except that 
horrid murder-trial.” (Society was just then enjoying its 
daily thrill of excitement in studying the details of a 
specially sensational murder in a thieve’s den in the East 
of London.) 

“I have no appetite for horrors,” Arthur replied. "But 
I hope we have learned the lesson they should teach us— 
though we are very apt to read it backwards!” 



IN A SHADY PLACE 


531 

"You speak in riddles,” said Lady Muriel. "Please 
explain yourself. See now,” suiting the action to the word, 
"I am sitting at your feet, just as if you were a second 
Gamaliel! Thanks, no.” (This was to me, who had risen to 
bring her chair back to its former place.) "Pray don’t dis¬ 
turb yourself. This tree and the grass make a very nice 
easy-chair. What is the lesson that one always reads 
wrong?” 

Arthur was silent for a minute. "I would like to be clear 
what it is I mean,” he said, slowly and thoughtfully, "be¬ 
fore I say anything to you —because you think about it.” 

Anything approaching to a compliment was so unusual 
an utterance for Arthur, that it brought a flush of pleasure 
to her cheek, as she replied "It is you, that give me the 
ideas to think about.” 

"One’s first thought”, Arthur proceeded, "in reading 
anything specially vile or barbarous, as done by a fellow- 
creature, is apt to be that we see a new depth of Sin re¬ 
vealed beneath us: and we seem to gaze down into that 
abyss from some higher ground, far apart from it.” 

"I think I understand you now. You mean that one 
ought to think—not ‘God, I thank Thee that I am not as 
other men are’—but ‘God, be merciful to me also, who 
might be, but for Thy grace, a sinner as vile as he!’ ” 

"No,” said Arthur. "I meant a great deal more than 
that.” 

She looked up quickly, but checked herself, and waited 
in silence. 

"One must begin further back, I think. Think of some 
other man, the same age as this poor wretch. Look back 
to the time when they both began life—before they had 
sense enough to know Right from Wrong. Then, at any 
rate, they were equal in God’s sight?” 

She nodded assent. 

"We have, then, two distinct epochs at which we may 
contemplate the two men whose lives we are comparing. 
At the first epoch they are, so far as moral responsibility 
is concerned, on precisely the same footing: they are alike 



532 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

incapable of doing right or wrong. At the second epoch 
the one man—I am taking an extreme case, for contrast 
—has won the esteem and love of all around him: his 
character is stainless, and his name will be held in honour 
hereafter: the other man’s history is one unvaried record 
of crime, and his life is at last forfeited to the outraged 
laws of his country. Now what have been the causes, in 
each case, of each man’s condition being what it is at the 
second epoch? They are of two kinds—one acting from 
within, the other from without. These two kinds need to 
be discussed separately—that is, if I have not already 
tired you with my prosing?” 

“On the contrary,” said Lady Muriel, "it is a special 
delight to me to have a question discussed in this way— 
analysed and arranged so that one can understand it. 
Some books, that profess to argue out a question, are to 
me intolerably wearisome, simply because the ideas are 
all arranged haphazard—a sort of ‘first come, first 
served’.” 

‘‘You are very encouraging,” Arthur replied, with a 
pleased look. ‘‘The causes, acting from within, which 
make a man’s character what it is at any given moment, 
are his successive acts of volition—that is, his acts of 
choosing whether he will do this or that.’’ 

‘‘We are to assume the existence of Free-Will?” I said, 
in order to have that point made quite clear. 

‘‘If not,” was the quiet reply, “cadit quaestio: and I 
have no more to say.” 

“We will assume it!” the rest of the audience—the 
majority, I may say, looking at it from Arthur’s point of 
view—imperiously proclaimed. The orator proceeded. 

“The causes, acting from without, are his surroundings 
—what Mr. Herbert Spencer calls his ‘environment’. Now 
the point I want to make clear is this, that a man is re¬ 
sponsible for his act of choosing, but not responsible for 
his environment. Hence, if these two men make, on some 
given occasion, when they are exposed to equal tempta¬ 
tion, equal efforts to resist and to choose the right, their 



IN A SHADY PLACE 


533 

condition, in the sight of God, must be the same. If He is 
pleased in the one case, so will He be in the other; if 
displeased in the one case, so also in the other.” 

“That is so, no doubt: I see it quite clearly,” Lady 
Muriel put in. 

“And yet, owing to their different environments, the 
one may win a great victory over the temptation, while 
the other falls into some black abyss of crime.” 

“But surely you would not say those men were equally 
guilty in the sight of God?” 

“Either that”, said Arthur, “or else I must give up my 
belief in God’s perfect justice. But let me put one more 
case, which will show my meaning even more forcibly. 
Let the one man be in a high social position—the other, 
say, a common thief. Let the one be tempted to some 
trivial act of unfair dealing—something which he can do 
with the absolute certainty that it will never be dis¬ 
covered—something which he can with perfect ease for¬ 
bear from doing—and which he distinctly knows to be a 
sin. Let the other be tempted to some terrible crime—as 
men would consider it—but under an almost overwhelm¬ 
ing pressure of motives—of course not quite overwhelm¬ 
ing, as that would destroy all responsibility. Now, in this 
case, let the second man make a greater effort at resistance 
than the first. Also suppose both to fall under the tempta¬ 
tion—I say that the second man is, in God’s sight, less 
guilty than the other.” 

Lady Muriel drew a long breath. “It upsets all one’s 
ideas of Right and Wrong—just at first! Why, in that 
dreadful murder-trial, you would say, I suppose, that it 
was possible that the least guilty man in the Court was 
the murderer, and that possibly the judge who tried him, 
by yielding to the temptation of making one unfair 
remark, had committed a crime outweighing the crim¬ 
inal’s whole career!” 

“Certainly I should,” Arthur firmly replied. “It sounds 
like a paradox, I admit. But just think what a grievous 
sin it must be, in God’s sight, to yield to some very slight 



534 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

temptation, which we could have resisted with perfect 
ease, and to do it deliberately, and in the full light of 
God’s Law. What penance can atone for a sin like that ?” 

"I ca'n't reject your theory," I said. "But how it seems 
to widen the possible area of Sin in the world!” 

"Is that so?" Lady Muriel anxiously enquired. 

"Oh, not so, not so!” was the eager reply. "To me it 
seems to clear away much of the cloud that hangs over 
the world’s history. When this view first made itself clear 
to me, I remember walking out into the fields, repeating 
to myself that line of Tennyson ‘There seemed no room for 
sense of wrong!’ The thought, that perhaps the real guilt 
of the human race was infinitely less than I fancied it— 
that the millions, whom I had thought of as sunk in hope¬ 
less depths of sin, were perhaps, in God’s sight, scarcely 
sinning at all—was more sweet than words can tell! Life 
seemed more bright and beautiful, when once that 
thought had come !'A livelier emerald twinkles in the grass, 
A purer sapphire melts into the sea!’ ” His voice trembled 
as he concluded, and the tears stood in his eyes. 

Lady Muriel shaded her face with her hand, and was 
silent for a minute. "It is a beautiful thought,” she said, 
looking up at last. "Thank you—Arthur, for putting it 
into my head!” 

The Earl returned in time to join us at tea, and to give 
us the very unwelcome tidings that a fever had broken 
out in the little harbour-town that lay below us—a fever 
of so malignant a type that, though it had only appeared 
a day or two ago, there were already more than a dozen 
down in it, two or three of whom were reported to be in 
imminent danger. 

In answer to the eager questions of Arthur—who of 
course took a deep scientific interest in the matter—he 
could give very few technical details, though he had met 
the local doctor. It appeared, however, that it was an 
almost new disease—at least in this century, though it 
might prove to be identical with the "Plague” recorded in 
History— very infectious, and frightfully rapid in its 



THE FAREWELL-PARTY 


535 

action. “It will not, however, prevent our party to¬ 
morrow,” he said in conclusion. “None of the guests 
belong to the infected district, which is, as you know, 
exclusively peopled by fishermen: so you may come with 
out any fear.” 

Arthur was very silent, all the way back, and, on reach¬ 
ing our lodgings, immediately plunged into medical 
studies, connected with the alarming malady of whose 
arrival he had just heard. 


Chapter IX 
The Farewell-Party 

On the following day, Arthur and I reached the Hall in 
good time, as only a few of the guests—it was to be a 
party of eighteen—had as yet arrived; and these were 
talking with the Earl, leaving us the opportunity of a few 
words apart with our hostess. 

“Who is that very learned-looking man with the large 
spectacles?” Arthur enquired. "I haven’t met him here 
before, have I?” 

“No, he’s a new friend of ours,” said Lady Muriel: “a 
German, I believe. He is such a dear old thing! And quite 
the most learned man I ever met—with one exception, of 
course!” she added humbly, as Arthur drew himself up 
with an air of offended dignity. 

“And the young lady in blue, just beyond him, talking 
to that foreign-looking man. Is she learned, too?” 

“I don’t know,” said Lady Muriel. “But I’m told she’s 
a wonderful piano-forte-player. I hope you’ll hear her to¬ 
night. I asked that foreigner to take her in, because he’s 
very musical, too. He’s a French Count, I believe; and he 
sings splendidly !” 

“Science—music—singing—you have indeed got a 



536 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

complete party!” said Arthur. “I feel quite a privileged 
person, meeting all these stars. I do love music!” 

“But the party isn't quite complete!” said Lady Muriel. 
“You haven't brought us those two beautiful children,” 
she went on, turning to me. “He brought them here to tea, 
you know, one day last summer/' again addressing 
Arthur: “and they are such darlings!” 

“They are, indeed,” I assented. 

“But why haven’t you brought them with you? You 
promised my father you would” 

“I’m very sorry,” I said; “but really it was impossible 
to bring them with me.” Here I most certainly meant to 
conclude the sentence: and it was with a feeling of utter 
amazement, which I cannot adequately describe, that I 
heard myself going on speaking. “—but they are to join 
me here in the course of the evening” were the words, 
uttered in my voice, and seeming to come from my lips. 

“I’m so glad!” Lady Muriel joyfully replied. "I shall en¬ 
joy introducing them to some of my friends here! When 
do you expect them?” 

I took refuge in silence. The only honest reply would 
have been “That was not my remark. I didn’t say it, and 
it isn’t true !” But I had not the moral courage to make 
such a confession. The character of a “lunatic” is not, I 
believe, very difficult to acquire : but it is amazingly diffi¬ 
cult to get rid of: and it seemed quite certain that any such 
speech as that would quite justify the issue of a writ “de 
lunatico inquirendo”. 

Lady Muriel evidently thought I had failed to hear her 
question, and turned to Arthur with a remark on some 
other subject; and I had time to recover from my shock of 
surprise—or to awake out of my momentary “eerie” con¬ 
dition, whichever it was. 

When things around me seemed once more to be real, 
Arthur was saying “I’m afraid there’s no help for it: they 
must be finite in number.” 

“I should be sorry to have to believe it,” said Lady 
Muriel. "Yet, when one comes to think of it, there are no 



THE FAREWELL-PARTY 


537 

new melodies, now-a-days. What people talk of as ‘the 
last new song’ always recalls to me some tune I’ve known 
as a child!” 

‘‘The day must come—if the world lasts long enough 
—” said Arthur, ‘‘when every possible tune will have been 
composed—every possible pun perpetrated—” (Lady 
Muriel wrung her hands, like a tragedy-queen) ‘‘and, 
worse than that, every possible book written! For the 
number of words is finite.” 

‘‘It’ll make very little difference to the authors I sug¬ 
gested. ‘‘Instead of saying ‘what book shall I write?’ an 
author will ask himself ‘which book shall I write?’ A 
mere verbal distinction!” 

Lady Muriel gave me an approving smile. “But lunatics 
would always write new books, surely?” she went on. 
“They couldn’t write the sane books over again!” 

“True,” said Arthur. “But their books would come to 
an end, also. The number of lunatic books is as finite as 
the number of lunatics.” 

“And that number is becoming greater every year,” 
said a pompous man, whom I recognized as the self- 
appointed showman on the day of the picnic. 

“So they say,” replied Arthur. “And, when ninety per 
cent, of us are lunatics,” (he seemed to be in a wildly non¬ 
sensical mood) “the asylums will be put to their proper 
use.” 

“And that is-?” the pompous man gravely enquired 

‘‘To shelter the sane!” said Arthur. “We shall bar our¬ 
selves in. The lunatics will have it all their own way, out¬ 
side. They’ll do it a little queerly, no doubt. Railway- 
collisions will be always happening: steamers always 
blowing up: most of the towns will be burnt down: most 
of the ships sunk-” 

“And most of the men killedl” murmured the pompous 
man, who was evidently hopelessly bewildered. 

“Certainly,” Arthur assented. “Till at last there will be 
fewer lunatics than sane men. Then we come out: they go 
in: and things return to their normal condition!” 



538 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

The pompous man frowned darkly, and bit his lip, and 
folded his arms, vainly trying to think it out. “He is jest- 
ing\” he muttered to himself at last, in a tone of withering 
contempt, as he stalked away. 

By this time the other guests had arrived; and dinner 
was announced. Arthur of course took down Lady Muriel: 
and I was pleased to find myself seated at her other side, 
with a severe-looking old lady (whom I had not met 
before, and whose name I had, as is usual in introductions, 
entirely failed to catch, merely gathering that it sounded 
like a compound-name) as my partner for the banquet. 

She appeared, however, to be acquainted with Arthur, 
and confided to me in a low voice her opinion that he was 
“a very argumentative young man”. Arthur, for his part, 
seemed well inclined to show himself worthy of the char¬ 
acter she had given him, and, hearing her say “I never 
take wine with my soup!” (this was not a confidence to 
me, but was launched upon Society, as a matter of general 
interest), he at once challenged a combat by asking her 
“when would you say that property commence in a plate 
of soup?” 

“This is my soup,” she sternly replied: “and what is 
before you is yours.” 

“No doubt,” said Arthur: “but when did I begin to own 
it? Up to the moment of its being put into the plate, it 
was the property of our host: while being offered round 
the table, it was, let us say, held in trust by the waiter: 
did it become mine when I accepted it? Or when it was 
placed before me? Or when I took the first spoonful?” 

“He is a very argumentative young man!” was all the 
old lady would say: but she said it audibly, this time, 
feeling that Society had a right to know it. 

Arthur smiled mischievously. “I shouldn’t mind bet¬ 
ting you a shilling”, he said, “that the Eminent Barrister 
next you” (It certainly is possible to say words so as to 
make them begin with capitals!! “ca’n't answer me!” 

“I never bet,” she sternly replied. 

“Not even sixpenny points at whist}" 



THE FAREWELL-PARTY 539 

“Neverl” she repeated. “Whist is innocent enough: but 
whist played for money V' She shuddered. 

Arthur became serious again. “I’m afraid I ca’n’t take 
that view,” he said. “I consider that the introduction of 
small stakes for card-playing was one of the most moral 
acts Society ever did, as Society.” 

“How was it so?” said Lady Muriel. 

“Because it took Cards, once for all, out of the category 
of games at which cheating is possible. Look at the way 
Croquet is demoralizing Society. Ladies are beginning to 
cheat at it, terribly: and, if they’re found out, they only 
laugh, and call it fun. But when there’s money at stake, 
that is out of the question. The swindler is not accepted as 
a wit. When a man sits down to cards, and cheats his 
friends out of their money, he doesn’t get much fun out of 
it—unless he thinks it fun to be kicked down stairs!” 

"If all gentlemen thought as badly of ladies as you do,” 
my neighbour remarked with some bitterness, “there 

would be very few—very few-”. She seemed doubtful 

how to end her sentence, but at last took “honeymoons” 
as a safe word. 

"On the contrary,” said Arthur, the mischievous smile 
returning to his face, “if only people would adopt my 
theory, the number of honeymoons—quite of a new kind 
—would be greatly increased!” 

“May we hear about this new kind of honeymoon?” 
said Lady Muriel. 

"Let X be the gentleman,” Arthur began, in a slightly 
raised voice, as he now found himself with an audience of 
six, including “Mein Herr”, who was seated at the other 
side of my polynomial partner. “Let X be the gentleman, 
and Y the lady to whom he thinks of proposing. He ap¬ 
plies for an Experimental Honeymoon. It is granted. 
Forthwith the young couple—accompanied by the great- 
aunt of Y, to act as chaperone—start for a month’s tour, 
during which they have many a moonlight-walk, and 
many a tete-a-tete conversation, and each can form a more 
correct estimate of the other’s character, in four weeks, 



540 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

than would have been possible in as many years, when 
meeting under the ordinary restrictions of Society. And it 
is only after their return that X finally decides whether he 
will, or will not, put the momentous question to Y!” 

"In nine cases out of ten”, the pompous man pro¬ 
claimed, "he would decide to break it off!” 

"Then, in nine cases out of ten,” Arthur rejoined, "an 
unsuitable match would be prevented, and both parties 
saved from misery! ” 

“The only really unsuitable matches”, the old lady 
remarked, "are those made without sufficient Money. 
Love may come afterwards. Money is needed to begin 
withl” 

This remark was cast loose upon Society, as a sort of 
general challenge; and, as such, it was at once accepted by 
several of those within hearing: Money became the key¬ 
note of the conversation for some time: and a fitful echo 
of it was again heard, when the dessert had been placed 
upon the table, the servants had left the room, and the 
Earl had started the wine in its welcome progress round 
the table. 

"I’m very glad to see you keep up the old customs,” I 
said to Lady Muriel as I filled her glass. “It’s really de¬ 
lightful to experience, once more, the peaceful feeling that 
comes over one when the waiters have left the room— 
when one can converse without the feeling of being over¬ 
heard, and without having dishes constantly thrust over 
one’s shoulder. How much more sociable it is to be able to 
pour out the wine for the ladies, and to hand the dishes to 
those who wish for them! ” 

"In that case, kindly send those peaches down here,” 
said a fat red-faced man, who was seated beyond our 
pompous friend. "I’ve been wishing for them—diagonally 
—for some time!” 

"Yes, it is a ghastly innovation”, Lady Muriel replied, 
"letting the waiters carry round the wine at dessert. For 
one thing, they always take it the wrong way round— 
which of course brings bad luck to everybody present!” 



THE FAREWELL-PARTY 


541 

“Better go the wrong way than not go at all\” said our 
host. “Would you kindly help yourself?” (This was to the 
fat red-faced man.) “You are not a teetotaler, I think?” 

“Indeed but I am\” he replied, as he pushed on the 
bottles. “Nearly twice as much money is spent in England 
on Drink, as on any other article of food. Read this card.” 
(What faddist ever goes about without a pocketful of the 
appropriate literature?) “The stripes of different colours 
represent the amounts spent of various articles of food. 
Look at the highest three. Money spent on butter and on 
cheese, thirty-five millions: on bread, seventy millions: on 
intoxicating liquors, one hundred and thirty-six millions! 
If I had my way, I would close every public-house in the 
land! Look at that card, and read the motto. That’s where 
all the money goes to!” 

“Have you seen the Anti-Teetotal Card!” Arthur inno¬ 
cently enquired. 

“No, Sir, I have not!” the orator savagely replied. 
“What is it like?” 

“Almost exactly like this one. The coloured stripes are 
the same. Only, instead of the words ‘Money spent on’, it 
has ‘Incomes derived from sale of’; and, instead of ‘That’s 
where all the money goes to’, its motto is ‘ That’s where 
all the money comes from!’ ” 

The red-faced man scowled, but evidently considered 
Arthur beneath his notice. So Lady Muriel took up the 
cudgels. “Do you hold the theory”, she enquired, “that 
people can preach teetotalism more effectually by being 
teetotalers themselves?” 

“Certainly I do!” replied the red-faced man. “Now, 
here is a case in point,” unfolding a newspaper-cutting: 
“let me read you this letter from a teetotaler. To the 
Editor. Sir, I was once a moderate drinker, and knew a man 
who drank to excess. I went to him. ‘Give up this drink,’ I 
said. ‘It will ruin your health!’ ‘You drink,’ he said: ‘why 
shouldn’t I?’ ‘Yes,’ I said, ‘but I know when to leave off.’ 
He turned away from me. ‘You drink in your way,’ he said: 
‘let me drink in mine. Be off!’ Then I saw that, to do any 



542 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

good with him, I must forswear drink. From that hour I 
haven’t touched a dropJ” 

“There! What do you say to that?” He looked round 
triumphantly, while the cutting was handed round for 
inspection. 

“How very curious!” exclaimed Arthur when it had 
reached him. “Did you happen to see a letter, last week, 
about early rising? It was strangely like this one.” 

The red-faced man’s curiosity was roused. “Where did 
it appear?” he asked. 

“Let me read it to you,” said Arthur. He took some 
papers from his pocket, opened one of them, and read as 
follows. To the Editor. Sir, 1 was once a moderate sleeper, 
and knew a man who slept to excess. I pleaded with him. 
‘Give up this lying in bed,’ I said. ‘It will ruin your health!’ 
‘You go to bed,’ he said: ‘why shouldn’t I?’ ‘Yes,’ I said, 
'but I know when to get up in the morning.’ He turned away 
from me. 'You sleep in your way,’ he said: ‘let me sleep in 
mine. Be off!’ Then I saw that to do any good with him, I 
must forswear sleep. From that hour I haven’t been to bed!” 

Arthur folded and pocketed his paper, and passed on 
the newspaper-cutting. None of us dared to laugh, the 
red-faced man was evidently so angry. “Your parallel 
doesn't run on all fours!” he snarled. 

‘‘Moderate drinkers never do so!” Arthur quietly 
replied. Even the stern old lady laughed at this. 

“But it needs many other things to make a perfect 
dinner!” said Lady Muriel, evidently anxious to change 
the subject. “Mein Herr! What is your idea of a perfect 
dinner party?” 

The old man looked around smilingly, and his gigantic 
spectacles seemed more gigantic than ever. "A perfect 
dinner-party?” he repeated. “First, it must be presided 
over by our present hostess!” 

“That of course!” she gaily interposed. “But what else. 
Mein Herr?” 

“I can but tell you what I have seen,” said Mein Herr, 
“in mine own—in the country I have traveled in.” 



THE FAREWELL-PARTY 543 

He paused for a full minute, and gazed steadily at the 
ceiling—with so dreamy an expression on his face, that I 
feared he was going off into a reverie, which seemed to be 
his normal state. However, after a minute, he suddenly 
began again. 

“That which chiefly causes the failure of a dinner-party, 
is the running-short—not of meat, nor yet of drink, but of 
conversation .” 

“In an English dinner-party”, I remarked, “I have 
never known small-talk run short!” 

“Pardon me,” Mein Herr respectfully replied, “I did 
not say ‘small-talk’. I said ‘conversation’. All such topics 
as the weather, or politics, or local gossip, are unknown 
among us. They are either vapid or controversial. What 
we need for conversation is a topic of interest and of novelty. 
To secure these things we have tried various plans— 
Moving-Pictures, Wild-Creatures, Moving-Guests, and a 
Revolving-Humorist. But this last is only adapted to 
small parties.” 

“Let us have it in four separate Chapters, please!” said 
Lady Muriel, who was evidently deeply interested—as, 
indeed, most of the party were, by this time: and, all 
down the table, talk had ceased, and heads were leaning 
forwards, eager to catch fragments of Mein Herr’s 
oration. 

"Chapter One! Moving-Pictures!” was proclaimed in 
the silvery voice of our hostess. 

“The dining-table is shaped like a circular ring,” Mein 
Herr began, in low dreamy tones, which, however, were 
perfectly audible in the silence. “The guests are seated at 
the inner side as well as the outer, having ascended to 
their places by a winding-staircase, from the room below. 
Along the middle of the table runs a little railway; and 
there is an endless train of trucks, worked round by 
machinery; and on each truck there are two pictures, 
leaning back to back. The train makes two circuits dur¬ 
ing dinner; and, when it has been once round, the 
waiters turn the pictures round in each truck, making 



544 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

them face the other way. Thus every guest sees every 
picture!” 

He paused, and the silence seemed deader than ever. 
Lady Muriel looked aghast. “Really, if this goes on,” she 
exclaimed, “I shall have to drop a pin! Oh, it’s my fault, 
is it?” (In answer to an appealing look from Mein Herr.) “I 
was forgetting my duty. Chapter Two! Wild-Creatures!” 

“We found the Moving-Pictures a little monotonous,” 
said Mein Herr. “People didn’t care to talk Art through a 
whole dinner; so we tried Wild-Creatures. Among the 
flowers, which we laid (just as you do) about the table, 
were to be seen, here a mouse, there a beetle; here a 
spider” (Lady Muriel shuddered), “there a wasp; here a 
toad, there a snake”; (“Father!” said Lady Muriel, plain¬ 
tively. “Did you hear that!”)', “so we had plenty to talk 
about!” 

“And when you got stung-” the old lady began. 

“They were all chained-up, dear Madam!” 

And the old lady gave a satisfied nod. 

There was no silence to follow, this time. “Third Chap¬ 
ter!” Lady Muriel proclaimed at once. “Moving-Guests!” 

“Even the Wild-Creatures proved monotonous,” the 
orator proceeded. “So we left the guests to choose their 
own subjects; and, to avoid monotony, we changed them. 
We made the table of two rings; and the inner ring moved 
slowly round, all the time, along with the floor in the 
middle and the inner row of guests. Thus every inner 
guest was brought face-to-face with every outer guest. It 
was a little confusing, sometimes, to have to begin a story 
to one friend and finish it to another; but every plan has 
its faults, you know.” 

“Fourth Chapter!” Lady Muriel hastened to announce. 
“The Revolving-Humorist!” 

“For a small party we found it an excellent plan to 
have a round table, with a hole cut in the middle large 
enough to hold one guest. Here we placed our best talker. 
He revolved slowly, facing every other guest in turn: and 
he told lively anecdotes the whole time!” 



JABBERING AND JAM 545 

“I shouldn’t like it!” murmured the pompous man. “It 
would make me giddy, revolving like that! I should 

decline to-” here it appeared to dawn upon him that 

perhaps the assumption he was making was not warranted 
by the circumstances: he took a hasty gulp of wine, and 
choked himself. 

But Mein Herr had relapsed into reverie, and made no 
further remark. Lady Muriel gave the signal, and the 
ladies left the room. 


Chapter X 
Jabbering and Jam 

When the last lady had disappeared, and the Earl, 
taking his place at the head of the table, had issued the 
military order “Gentlemen! Close up the ranks, if you 
please!” and when, in obedience to his command, we had 
gathered ourselves compactly round him, the pompous 
man gave a deep sigh of relief, filled his glass to the brim, 
pushed on the wine, and began one of his favourite ora¬ 
tions. “They are charming, no doubt! Charming, but very 
frivolous. They drag us down, so to speak, to a lower 
level. They-” 

“Do not all pronouns require antecedent nouns'}” the 
Earl gently enquired. 

“Pardon me,” said the pompous man, with lofty con¬ 
descension. “I had overlooked the noun. The ladies. We 
regret their absence. Yet we console ourselves. Thought is 
free. With them, we are limited to' trivial topics—Art, 
Literature, Politics, and so forth. One can bear to discuss 
such paltry matters with a lady. But no man, in his senses 
—” (he looked sternly round the table, as if defying con¬ 
tradiction) “—ever yet discussed WINE with a lady!” 
He sipped his glass of port, leaned back in his chair, and 
slowly raised it up to his eye, so as to look through it at 



546 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

the lamp. “The vintage, my Lord?” he enquired, glancing 
at his host. 

The Earl named the date. 

“So I had supposed. But one likes to be certain. The 
tint is, perhaps, slightly pale. But the body is unquestion¬ 
able. And as for the bouquet -” 

Ah, that magic Bouquet! How vividly that magic word 
recalled the scene! The little beggar boy turning his 
somersault in the road—the sweet little crippled maiden 
in my arms—the mysterious evanescent nursemaid—all 
rushed tumultuously into my mind, like the creatures of a 
dream: and through this mental haze there still boomed 
on, like the tolling of a bell, the solemn voice of the great 
connoisseur of WINE! 

Even his utterances had taken on themselves a strange 
and dream-like form. “No,” he resumed—and why is it, 
I pause to ask, that, in taking up the broken thread of a 
dialogue, one always begins with this cheerless monosyl¬ 
lable? After much anxious thought, I have come to the 
conclusion that the object in view is the same as that of 
the schoolboy, when the sum he is working has got into a 
hopeless muddle, and when in despair he takes the sponge, 
washes it all out, and begins again. Just in the same way 
the bewildered orator, by the simple process of denying 
everything that has been hitherto asserted, makes a clean 
sweep of the whole discussion, and can “start fair” with 
a fresh theory. “No,” he resumed: “there’s nothing like 
cherry-jam, after all. That’s what I say!” 

“Not for all qualities!” an eager little man shrilly inter¬ 
posed. “For richness of general tone I don’t say that it has 
a rival. But for delicacy of modulation—for what one may 
call the ‘harmonics’ of flavour—give me good old rasp- 
berry- jam!” 

“Allow me one word!” The fat red-faced man, quite 
hoarse with excitement, broke into the dialogue. “It’s too 
important a question to be settled by Amateurs! I can 
give you the views of a Professional —perhaps the most 
experienced jam-taster now living. Why, I’ve known him 



JABBERING AND JAM 547 

fix the age of strawberry-jam, to a day —and we all know 
what a difficult jam it is to give a date to—on a single 
tasting! Well, I put to him the very question you are dis¬ 
cussing. His words were 'cherry- jam is best, for mere 
chiaroscuro of flavour: raspberry-]am lends itself best to 
those resolved discords that linger so lovingly on the 
tongue: but, for rapturous utter ness of saccharine perfec¬ 
tion, it’s apricot-jam, first and the rest nowhere !' That was 
well put, wasn’t it ?” 

“Consummately put!’’ shrieked the eager little man. 

“I know your friend well,” said the pompous man. “As 
a jam-taster, he has no rival! Yet I scarcely think-” 

But here the discussion became general: and his words 
were lost in a confused medley of names, every guest 
sounding the praises of his own favourite jam. At length, 
through the din, our host’s voice made itself heard. “Let 
us join the ladies!” These words seemed to recall me to 
waking life; and I felt sure that, for the last few minutes, 
I had relapsed into the “eerie” state. 

"A strange dream!” I said to myself as we trooped up¬ 
stairs. “Grown men discussing, as seriously as if they were 
matters of life and death, the hopelessly trivial details or 
mere delicacies, that appeal to no higher human function 
than the nerves of the tongue and palate! What a humi¬ 
liating spectacle such a discussion would be in waking 
life!” 

When, on our way to the drawing-room, I received 
from the housekeeper my little friends, clad in the dainti¬ 
est of evening costumes, and looking, in the flush of ex¬ 
pectant delight, more radiantly beautiful than I had ever 
seen them before. I felt no shock of surprise, but accepted 
the fact with the same unreasoning apathy with which 
one meets the events of a dream, and was merely con¬ 
scious of a vague anxiety as to how they would acquit 
themselves in so novel a scene—forgetting that Court-life 
in Outland was as good training as they could need for 
Society in the more substantial world. 

It would be best, I thought, to introduce them as soon 



548 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

as possible to some good-natured lady-guest, and I 
selected the young lady whose piano-forte-playing had 
been so much talked of. “I am sure you like children,” I 
said. “May I introduce two little friends of mine? This is 
Sylvie—and this is Bruno.” 

The young lady kissed Sylvie very graciously. She 
would have done the same for Bruno, but he hastily drew 
back out of reach. “Their faces are new to me,” she said. 

‘ ‘ Where do you come from, my dear ? ” 

I had not anticipated so inconvenient a question; and, 
fearing that it might embarrass Sylvie, I answered for 
her. “They come from some distance. They are only here 
just for this one evening.” 

“How far have you come, dear?” the young lady per¬ 
sisted. 

Sylvie looked puzzled. “A mile or two, I think,” she 
said doubtfully. 

“A mile or three,” said Bruno. 

“You shouldn’t say ‘a mile or three’,” Sylvie corrected 
him. 

The young lady nodded approval. “Sylvie’s quite right. 
It isn’t usual to say ‘a mile or three’.” 

"It would be usual—if we said it often enough,” said 
Bruno. 

It was the young lady’s turn to look puzzled now. “He’s 
very quick, for his age!” she murmured. “You’re not 
more than seven, are you, dear?” she added aloud. 

“I’m not so many as that,” said Bruno. “I’m one. 
Sylvie’s one. Sylvie and me is two. Sylvie taught me to 
count.” 

“Oh, I wasn’t counting you, you know!” the young 
lady laughingly replied. 

“Hasn’t oo learnt to count?” said Bruno. 

The young lady bit her lip. “Dear! What embarrassing 
questions he does ask!” she said in a half-audible “aside”. 

"Bruno, you shouldn’t!” Sylvie said reprovingly. 

“Shouldn’t what?” said Bruno. 

"You shouldn’t ask—that sort of questions.” 



JABBERING AND JAM 549 

“What sort of questions?” Bruno mischievously per¬ 
sisted. 

“What she told you not,” Sylvie replied, with a shy 
glance at the young lady, and losing all sense of grammar 
in her confusion. 

“Oo ca’n’t pronounce it!” Bruno triumphantly cried. 
And he turned to the young lady, for sympathy in his 
victory. ‘‘I knewed she couldn’t pronounce ‘umbrella- 
sting’!” 

The young lady thought it best to return to the arith¬ 
metical problem. “When I asked if you were seven, you 
know, I didn’t mean ‘how many children ?’ I meant ‘how 
many years ’ ” 

‘‘Only got two ears,” said Bruno. ‘‘Nobody’s got seven 
ears.” 

“And you belong to this little girl?” the young lady 
continued, skilfully evading the anatomical problem. 

“No I doosn’t belong to her\” said Bruno. “Sylvie 
belongs to me\” And he clasped his arms round her as he 
added “She are my very mine!” 

“And, do you know,” said the young lady, “I’ve a little 
sister at home, exactly like your sister? I’m sure they’d 
love each other.” 

“They’d be very extremely useful to each other,” 
Bruno said, thoughtfully. “And they wouldn’t want no 
looking-glasses to brush their hair wiz.” 

“Why not, my child?” 

“Why, each one would do for the other one’s looking- 
glass a-course!” cried Bruno. 

But here Lady Muriel, who had been standing by, 
listening to this bewildering dialogue, interrupted it to 
ask if the young lady would favour us with some music; 
and.the children followed their new friend to the piano. 

Arthur came and sat down by me. "If rumour speaks 
truly,” he whispered, “we are to have a real treat!” And 
then, amid a breathless silence, the performance began. 

She was one of those players whom Society talks of as 
“brilliant”, and she dashed into the loveliest of Haydn’s 



550 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

Symphonies in a style that was clearly the outcome of 
years of patient study under the best masters. At first it 
seemed to be the perfection of piano-forte-playing; but in 
a few minutes I began to ask myself, wearily, “What is it 
that is wanting? Why does one get no pleasure from it?” 

Then I set myself to listen intently to every note; and 
the mystery explained itself. There was an almost perfect 
mechanical correctness —and there was nothing else! False 
notes, of course, did not occur: she knew the piece too well 
for that ; but there was just enough irregularity of time to 
betray that the player had no real “ear” for music—just 
enough inarticulateness in the more elaborate passages to 
show that she did not think her audience worth taking 
real pains for—just enough mechanical monotony of 
accent to take all soul out of the heavenly modulations 
she was profaning—in short, it was simply irritating; and, 
when she had rattled off the finale and had struck the 
final chord as if, the instrument being now done with, it 
didn’t matter how many wires she broke, I could not even 
affect to join in the stereotyped “Oh, thank you!” which 
was chorused around me. 

Lady Muriel joined us for a moment. “Isn’t it beauti¬ 
ful}’ ’ she whispered to Arthur, with a mischievous smile. 

“No, it isn’t!” said Arthur. But the gentle sweetness of 
his face quite neutralized the apparent rudeness of the 
reply. 

“Such execution, you know!” she persisted. 

“That’s what she deserves,” Arthur doggedly replied: 
“but people are so prejudiced against capital-” 

“Now you’re beginning to talk nonsense!” Lady Muriel 
cried. “But you do like Music, don’t you? You said so 
just now.” 

“Do I like Music}” the Doctor repeated softly to him¬ 
self. "My dear Lady Muriel, there is Music and Music. 
Your question is painfully vague. You might as well ask 
‘Do you like People}’ ” 

Lady Muriel bit her lip, frowned, and stamped with one 
tiny foot. As a dramatic, representation of ill-temper, it 



JABBERING AND JAM 551 

was distinctly not a success. However, it took in one of 
her audience, and Bruno hastened to interpose, as peace¬ 
maker in a rising quarrel, with the remark “I likes 
Peoples!" 

Arthur laid a loving hand on the little curly head. 
"What? All Peoples?” he enquired. 

"Not all Peoples,” Bruno explained. "Only but Sylvie 
—and Lady Muriel—and him—” (pointing to the Earl) 
"and 00—and 00!” 

"You shouldn’t point at people,” said Sylvie. "It’s very 
rude.” 

"In Bruno’s World,” I said, "there are only four 
People—worth mentioning!” 

"In Bruno’s World!” Lady Muriel repeated thought¬ 
fully. "A bright and flowery world. Where the grass is 
always green, where the breezes always blow softly, and 
the rain-clouds never gather; where there are no wild 
beasts, and no deserts-” 

"There must be deserts,” Arthur decisively remarked. 
"At least if it was my ideal world.” 

"But what possible use is there in a desertV’ said Lady 
Muriel. “Surely you would have no wilderness in your 
ideal world?” 

Arthur smiled. "But indeed I would!” he said. "A wil¬ 
derness would be more necessary than a railway; and far 
more conducive to general happiness than church-bells!” 

"But what would you use it for?” 

“To practise music in,” he replied. “All the young 
ladies, that have no ear for music, but insist on learning 
it, should be conveyed, every morning, two or three miles 
into the wilderness. There each would find a comfortable 
room provided for her, and also a cheap secondhand 
piano-forte, on which she might play for hours, without 
adding one needless pang to the sum of human misery!” 

Lady Muriel glanced round in alarm, lest these bar¬ 
barous sentiments should be overheard. But the fair 
musician was at a safe distance. "At any rate you must 
allow that she’s a sweet girl?” she resumed. 



552 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“Oh, certainly. As sweet as eau sucree. if you choose— 
and nearly as interesting!" 

“You are incorrigible!" said Lady Muriel, and turned 
to me. “I hope you found Mrs. Mills an interesting com¬ 
panion?" 

“Oh, that’s her name, is it?" I said. “I fancied there was 
moreoi it." 

“So there is: and it will be ‘at your proper peril’ (what¬ 
ever that may mean) if you ever presume to address her 
as ‘Mrs. Mills’. She is ‘Mrs. Ernest—Atkinson—Mills'!" 

“She is one of those would-be grandees," said Arthur, 
“who think that, by tacking on to their surname all their 
spare Christian-names, with hyphens between, they can 
give it an aristocratic flavour. As if it wasn’t trouble 
enough to remember one surname!” 

By this time the room was getting crowded, as the 
guests, invited for the evening-party, were beginning to 
arrive, and Lady Muriel had to devote herself to the task 
of welcoming them, which she did with the sweetest grace 
imaginable. Sylvie and Bruno stood by her, deeply inter¬ 
ested in the process. 

“I hope you like my friends?” she said to them. “Spe¬ 
cially my dear old friend, Mein Herr (What’s become of 
him, I wonder? Oh, there he is!), that old gentleman in 
spectacles, with a long beard!" 

“He’s a grand old gentleman!” Sylvie said, gazing 
admiringly at “Mein Herr”, who had settled down in a 
corner, from which his mild eyes beamed on us through a 
gigantic pair of spectacles. “And what a lovely beard!" 

“What does he call his-self ?” Bruno whispered. 

“He calls himself ‘Mein Herr’,” Sylvie whispered in 
reply. 

Bruno shook his head impatiently. “That’s what he 
calls his hair, not his self, oo silly!" He appealed to me. 
“What doos he call his self, Mister Sir?" 

“That's the only name I know of,” I said. “But he looks 
very lonely. Don’t you pity his grey hairs?” 

“I pities his self” said Bruno, still harping on the mis- 



THE MAN IN THE MOON 553 

nomer; “but I doosn't pity his hair, one bit. His hair ca’n’t 
feel!” 

“We met him this afternoon,” said Sylvie. “We'd been 
to see Nero, and we’d had such fun with him, making him 
invisible again! And we saw that nice old gentleman as 
we came back.” 

“Well, let’s go and talk to him, and cheer him up a 
little,” I said: “and perhaps we shall find out what he calls 
himself.” 


Chapter XI 
The Man in the Moon 

The children came willingly. With one of them on each 
side of me, I approached the corner occupied by “Mein 
Herr”. “You don’t object to children , I hope?” I began. 

“Crabbed age and youth cannot live together!” the old 
man cheerfully replied, with a most genial smile. “Now 
take a good look at me, my children! You would guess me 
to be an old man, wouldn’t you?” 

At first sight, though his face had reminded me so 
mysteriously of “the Professor”, he had seemed to be 
decidedly a younger man: but, when I came to look into 
the wonderful depth of those large dreamy eyes, I felt, 
with a strange sense of awe, that he was incalculably 
older, he seemed to gaze at us out of some by-gone age, 
centuries away. 

“I don’t know if oo’re an old man,” Bruno answered, as 
the children, won over by the gentle voice, crept a little 
closer to him. “I thinks oo’re eighty-three.’’ 

“He is very exact!” said Mein Herr. 

“Is he anything like right?” I said. 

“There are reasons,” Mein Herr gently replied, “reasons 
which I am not at liberty to explain, for not mentioning 
definitely any Persons, Places, or Dates. One remark only 



554 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

I will permit myself to make—that the period of life, 
between the ages of a hundred-and-sixty-five and a 
hundred-and-seventy-five, is a specially safe one." 

"How do you make that out?” I said. 

"Thus. You would consider swimming to be a very safe 
amusement, if you scarcely ever heard of any one dying 
of it. Am I not right in thinking that you never heard of 
any one dying between those two ages?” 

"I see what you mean,” I said: "but I’m. afraid you 
ca’n’t prove swimming to be safe, on the same principle. 
It is no uncommon thing to hear of some one being 
drowned” 

“In my country,” said Mein Herr, “no one is ever 
drowned.” 

"Is there no water deep enough?” 

"Plenty! But we ca’n’t sink. We are all lighter than 
water. Let me explain,” he added, seeing my look of sur¬ 
prise. "Suppose you desire a race of pigeons of a parti¬ 
cular shape or colour, do you not select, from year to year, 
those that are nearest to the shape or colour you want, 
and keep those, and part with the others?” 

"We do,” I replied. "We call it ‘Artificial Selection’.” 

"Exactly so,” said Mein Herr. "Well, we have prac¬ 
tised that for some centuries—constantly selecting the 
lightest people: so that, now, everybody is lighter than 
water.” 

"Then you never can be drowned at seal” 

"Never! It is only on the land —for instance, when at¬ 
tending a play in a theatre—that we are in such a danger.” 

"How can that happen at a theatret” 

"Our theatres are all underground. Large tanks of 
water are placed above. If a fire breaks out, the taps are 
turned, and in one minute the theatre is flooded, up to 
the very roof! Thus the fire is extinguished.” 

"And the audience, I presume?” 

"That is a minor matter,” Mein Herr carelessly replied. 
"But they have the comfort of knowing that, whether 
drowned or not, they are all lighter than water. We have 



THE MAN IN THE MOON 


555 

not yet reached the standard of making people lighter 
than air: but we are aiming at it; and, in another 
thousand years or so —” 

“What doos oo do wiz the peoples that’s too heavy?’’ 
Bruno solemnly enquired. 

“We have applied the same process,” Mein Herr con¬ 
tinued, not noticing Bruno's question, “to many other 
purposes. We have gone on selecting walking-sticks — 
always keeping those that walked best —till we have ob¬ 
tained some, that can walk by themselves! We have gone 
on selecting cotton-wool, till we have got some lighter 
than air! You’ve no idea what a useful material it is! We 
call it ‘Imponderal’.” 

“What do you use it for?” 

“Well, chiefly for packing articles, to go by Parcel- 
Post. It makes them weigh less than nothing, you know.” 

“And how do the Post Office people know what you 
have to pay?” 

“That’s the beauty of the new system!” Mein Herr 
cried exultingly. “They pay us: we don’t pay them ! I’ve 
often got as much as five shillings for sending a parcel.” 

“But doesn’t your Government object?” 

“Well, they do object a little. They say it comes so ex¬ 
pensive, in the long run. But the thing’s as clear as day¬ 
light, by their own rules. If I send a parcel, that weighs a 
pound more than nothing, I pay three-pence: so, of course, 
if it weighs a pound less than nothing, I ought to receive 
three-pence.” 

“It is indeed a useful article!” I said. 

“Yet even ‘Imponderal’ has its disadvantages,” he re¬ 
sumed. “I bought some, a few days ago, and put it into 
my hat, to carry it home, and the hat simply floated 
away!” 

“Had oo some of that funny stuff in oor hat to-day ?” 
Bruno enquired. “Sylvie and me saw oo in the road, and 
oor hat were ever so high up! Weren’t it, Sylvie?” 

"No, that was quite another thing,” said Mein Herr. 
"There was a drop or two of rain falling: so I put my hat 



556 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

on the top of my stick—as an umbrella, you know. As I 
came along the road”, he continued, turning to me, “I 
was overtaken by-” 

"—a shower of rain?” said Bruno. 

“Well, it looked more like the tail of a dog,” Mein Herr 
replied. “It was the most curious thing! Something 
rubbed affectionately against my knee. And I looked 
down. And I could see nothing\ Only, about a yard off, 
there was a dog’s tail, wagging, all by itself!” 

“Oh, Sylvie'.” Bruno murmured reproachfully. “Oo 
didn’t finish making him visible!” 

“I’m so sorry!” Sylvie said, looking very penitent. “I 
meant to rub it along his back, but we were in such a 
hurry. We’ll go and finish him to-morrow. Poor thing! 
Perhaps he’ll get no supper to-night!” 

“Course he won’t!” said Bruno. "Nobody never gives 
bones to a dog’s tail!” 

Mein Herr looked from one to the other in blank aston¬ 
ishment. “I do not understand you,” he said. “I had lost 
my way, and I was consulting a pocket-map, and some¬ 
how I had dropped one of my gloves, and this invisible 
Something, that had rubbed against my knee, actually 
brought it back to me!” 

“Course he did!” said Bruno. “He’s welly fond of fetch¬ 
ing things.” 

Mein Herr looked so thoroughly bewildered that 1 
thought it best to change the subject. “What a useful 
thing a pocket-map is!” I remarked. 

“That’s another thing we’ve learned iromyour Nation,” 
said Mein Herr, “map-making. But we’ve carried it much 
further than you. What do you consider the largest map 
that would be really useful?” 

“About six inches to the mile.” 

“Only six inches'.” exclaimed Mein Herr. “We very 
soon got to six yards to the mile. Then we tried a hundred 
yards to the mile. And then came the grandest idea of all! 
We actually made a map of the country, on the scale of 
a mile to the milel” 



THE MAN IN THE MOON 557 

“Have you used it much?” I enquired. 

“It has never been spread out, yet,” said Mein Herr: 
“the farmers objected: they said it would cover the whole 
country, and shut out the sunlight! So we now use the 
country itself, as its own map, and I assure you it does 
nearly as well. Now let me ask you another ques¬ 
tion. What is the smallest world you. would care to 
inhabit?” 

"/ know!” cried Bruno, who was listening intently. 
“I’d like a little teeny-tiny world, just big enough for 
Sylvie and me!” 

“Then you would have to stand on opposite side of it,” 
said Mein Herr. “And so you would never see your sister 
atallV’ 

“And I’d have no lessons,” said Bruno. 

“You don’t mean to say you’ve been trying experi¬ 
ments in that direction!” I said. 

“Well, not experiments exactly. We do not profess to 
construct planets. But a scientific friend of mine, who has 
made several balloon-voyages, assures me he has visited a 
planet so small that he could walk right round it in twenty 
minutes! There had been a great battle, just before his 
visit, which had ended rather oddly: the vanquished army 
ran away at full speed, and in a very few minutes found 
themselves face-to-face with the victorious army, who 
were marching home again, and who were so frightened 
at finding themselves between two armies, that they sur¬ 
rendered at once! Of course that lost them the battle, 
though, as a matter of fact, they had killed all the soldiers 
on the other side.” 

“Killed soldiers ca’n't run away,” Bruno thoughtfully 
remarked. 

“ ‘Killed’ is a technical word,” replied Mein Herr. “In 
the little planet I speak of, the bullets were made of soft 
black stuff, which marked everything it touched. So, 
after a battle, all you had to do was to count how many 
soldiers on each side were ‘killed’—that means ‘marked 
on the back’, for marks in front didn’t count.” 



558 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

"Then you couldn't 'kill' any, unless they ran away?" I 
said. 

"My scientific friend found out a better plan than that. 
He pointed out that, if only the bullets were sent the other 
way round the world, they would hit the enemy in the 
back. After that, the worst marksmen were considered the 
best soldiers; and the very worst of all always got First 
Prize." 

"And how did you decide which was the very worst of 
all}” 

"Easily. The best possible shooting is, you know, to hit 
what is exactly in front of you: so of course the worst 
possible is to hit what is exactly behind you.” 

"They were strange people in that little planet!” I said. 

"They were indeed! Perhaps their method of govern¬ 
ment was the strangest of all. In this planet, I am told, a 
Nation consists of a number of Subjects, and one King: 
but, in the little planet I speak of, it consisted of a num¬ 
ber of Kings, and one Subjectl” 

"Yo.u say you are ‘told’ what happens in this planet,” I 
said. "May I venture to guess that you yourself are a 
visitor from some other planet?” 

Bruno clapped his hands in his excitement. “Is oo the 
Man-in-the-Moon?” he cried. 

Mein Herr looked uneasy. "I am not in the Moon, my 
child,” he said evasively. "To return to what I was saying. 
I think that method of government ought to answer well. 
You see, the Kings would be sure to make Laws contra¬ 
dicting each other: so the Subject could never be pun¬ 
ished, because, whatever he did he’d be obeying some 
Law.” 

"And, whatever he did, he’d be <A'sobeying some Law!” 
cried Bruno. "So he'd always be punished!” 

Lady Muriel was passing at the moment, and caught 
the last word. “Nobody’s going to be punished her el” she 
said, taking Bruno in her arms. "This is Liberty-Hall! 
Would you lend me the children for a minute?” 

"The children desert us, you see,” I said to Mein Herr, 



THE MAN IN THE MOON 559 

as she carried them off: “so we old folk must keep each 
other company!” 

The old man sighed. “Ah, well! We’re old folk now ; 
and yet I was a child myself, once—at least I fancy so.” 

It did seem a rather unlikely fancy, I could not help 
owning to myself—looking at the shaggy white hair, and 
the long beard—that he could ever have been a child. 
“You are fond of young people?” I said. 

“Young men,” he replied. “Not of children exactly. I 
used to teach young men—many a year ago—in my dear 
old University!” 

"I didn’t quite catch its name?” I hinted. 

“I did not name it,” the old man replied mildly. “Nor 
would you know the name if I did. Strange tales I could 
tell you of all the changes I have witnessed there! But it 
would weary you, I fear.” 

“No, indeed !” I said. “Pray go on. What kind of 
changes?” 

But the old man seemed to be more in a humour for 
questions than for answers. “Tell me,” he said, laying his 
hand impressively on my arm, “tell me something. For 
I am a stranger in your land, and I know little of your 
modes of education: yet something tells me we are further 
on than you in the eternal cycle of change—and that 
many a theory we have tried and found to fail, you also 
will try, with a wilder enthusiasm: you also will find to 
fail, with a bitterfer despair!” 

It was strange to see how, as he talked, and his words 
flowed more and more freely, with a certain rhythmic 
eloquence, his features seemed to glow with an inner 
light, and the whole man seemed to be transformed, as 
if he had grown fifty years younger in a moment of time. 



Chapter XII 


Fairy-Music 

The silence that ensued was broken by the voice of the 
musical young lady, who had seated herself near us, and 
was conversing with one of the newly-arrived guests. 
“Well!” she said in a tone of scornful surprise. “We 
are to have something new in the way of music, it 
appears!” 

I looked round for an explanation, and was nearly as 
much astonished as the speaker herself: it was Sylvie 
whom Lady Muriel was leading to the piano! 

“Do try it, my darling!” she was saying. “I’m sure you 
can play very nicely!” 

Sylvie looked round at me, with tears in her eyes. I 
tried to give her an encouraging smile, but it was evi¬ 
dently a great strain on the nerves of a child so wholly 
unused to be made an exhibition of, and she was fright¬ 
ened and unhappy. Yet here came out the perfect sweet¬ 
ness of her disposition: I could see that she was resolved 
to forget herself, and do her best to give pleasure to Lady 
Muriel and her friends. She seated herself at the instru¬ 
ment, arid began instantly. Time and expression, so far 
as one could judge, were perfect: but her touch was one 
of such extraordinary lightness that it was at first scarce¬ 
ly possible, through the hum of conversation which still 
continued, to catch a note of what she was playing. 

But in a minute the hum had died away into absolute 
silence, and we all sat, entranced and breathless, to listen 
to such heavenly music as none then present could ever 
forget. 

Hardly touching the notes at first, she played a sort of 
introduction in a minor key—like an embodied twilight; 
one felt as though the lights were growing dim, and a 
mist were creeping through the room. Then there flashed 
through the gathering gloom the first few notes of a 
melody so lovely, so delicate, that one held one’s breath, 

560 



FAIRY-MUSIC 


561 

fearful to lose a single note of it. Ever and again the 
music dropped into the pathetic minor key with which it 
had begun, and, each time that the melody forced its 
way, so to speak, through the enshrouding gloom into 
the light of day, it was more entrancing, more magically 
sweet. Under the airy touch of the child, the instrument 
actually seemed to warble, like a bird. “Rise up, my love, 
my fair one,” it seemed to sing, “and come away! For lo, 
the winter is past, the rain is over and gone; the flowers 
appear on the earth; the time of the singing of birds is 
come!” One could fancy one heard the tinkle of the last 
few drops, shaken from the trees by a passing gust—that 
one saw the first glittering rays of the sun, breaking 
through the clouds. 

The Count hurried across the room in great excite¬ 
ment. “I cannot remember myself”, he exclaimed, “of 
the name of this so charming an air! It is of an opera, 
most surely. Yet not even will the opera remind his name 
to me! What you call him, dear child?” 

Sylvie looked round at him with a rapt expression of 
face. She had ceased playing, but her fingers still wan¬ 
dered fitfully over the keys. All fear and shyness had 
quite passed away now, and nothing remained but the 
pure joy of the music that had thrilled our hearts. 

“The title of it!” the Count repeated impatiently. “How 
call you the opera?” 

“I don’t know what an opera is,” Sylvie half-whis¬ 
pered. 

“How, then, call you the air?” 

“I don’t know any name for it,” Sylvie replied, as she 
rose from the instrument. 

“But this is marvellous!” exclaimed the Count, follow¬ 
ing the child, and addressing himself to me, as if 1 were 
the proprietor of this musical prodigy, and so must know 
the origin of her music. “You have heard her play this, 
sooner—I would say ‘before this occasion’? How call 
you the air?” 

I shook my head; but was saved from more questions 


T 


L.C. 



562 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

by Lady Muriel, who came up to petition the Count for 
a song. 

The Count spread out his hands apologetically, and 
ducked his head. “But, Milady, I have already respected 
—I would say prospected—all your songs; and there shall 
be none fitted to my voice! They are not for basso voices!" 

“Wo'n't you look at them again?” Lady Muriel im¬ 
plored. 

“Let’s help him!" Bruno whispered to Sylvie. “Let’s 
get him —you know!” 

Sylvie nodded. “Shall we look for a song for you?” 
she said sweetly to the Count. 

“Mais ouil” the little man exclaimed. 

“Of course we may!” said Bruno, while, each taking 
a hand of the delighted Count, they led him to the music- 
stand. 

“There is still hope!” said Lady Muriel over her shoul¬ 
der, as she followed them. 

I turned to "Mein Herr”, hoping to resume our in¬ 
terrupted conversation. “You were remarking-” I 

began: but at this moment Sylvie came to call Bruno, 
who had returned to my side, looking unusually serious. 
“Do come, Bruno!” she entreated. “You know we’ve 
nearly found it!” Then, in a whisper, “The locket’s in 
my hand, now. I couldn’t get it out while they were 
looking!” 

But Bruno drew back. “The man called me names,” 
he said with dignity. 

“What names?” I enquired with some curiosity. 

“I asked him”, said Bruno, "which sort of song he liked. 
And he said ‘A song of a man, not of a lady’. And I said 
‘Shall Sylvie and me find you the song of Mister Tottles?’ 
And he said ‘Wait, eel!’ And I’m not an eel, 00 know!” 

"I’m sure he didn’t mean it!” Sylvie said earnestly. 
“It’s something French—you know he ca’n’t talk English 
so well as-” 

Bruno relented visibly. “Course he knows no better, if 
he’s Flench! Flenchmen never can - speak English so 



FAIRY-MUSIC 563 

goodly as us\” And Sylvie led him away, a willing cap¬ 
tive. 

“Nice children!” said the old man, taking off his spec¬ 
tacles and rubbing them carefully. Then he put them on 
again, and watched with an approving smile, while the 
children tossed over the heap of music, and we just 
caught Sylvie’s reproving words, “We’re not making hay, 
Bruno!” 

“This has been a long interruption to our conversa¬ 
tion,” I said. “Pray let us go on!” 

“Willingly!” replied the gentle old man. “I was much 

interested in what you-” He paused a moment, and 

passed his hand uneasily across his brow. “One forgets,” 
he murmured. “What was I saying? Oh! Something you 
were to tell me. Yes. Which of your teachers do you value 
the most highly, those whose words are easily under¬ 
stood, or those who puzzle you at every turn?” 

I feel obliged to admit that we generally admired most 
the teachers we couldn’t.quite understand. 

“Just so,” said Mein Herr. “That’s the way it begins. 
Well, we were at that stage some eighty years ago—or 
was it ninety? Our favourite teacher got more obscure 
every year; and every year we admired him more—just 
as your Art-fanciers call mist the fairest feature in a land¬ 
scape, and admire a view with frantic delight when they 
can see nothing! Now I’ll tell you how it ended. It was 
Moral Philosophy that our idol lectured on. Well, his 
pupils couldn’t make head or tail of it, but they got it all 
by heart; and, when Examination-time came, they 
wrote it down; and the Examiners said ‘Beautiful! (What 
depth!’ ” 

“But what good was it to the young men afterwards ?” 

“Why, don’t you see?” replied Mein Herr. “They be¬ 
came teachers in their turn, and they said all these things 
over again; and their pupils wrote it all down; and the 
Examiners accepted it; and nobody had the ghost of an 
idea what it all meant!” 

“And how did it end? ” 



564 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“It ended this way. We woke up one fine day, and 
found there was no one in the place that knew anything 
about Moral Philosophy. So we abolished it, teachers, 
classes, examiners, and all. And if any one wanted to 
learn anything about it, he had to make it out for him¬ 
self; and after another twenty years or so there were sev¬ 
eral men that really knew something about it! Now tell 
me another thing. How long do you teach a youth before 
you examine him, in your Universities?” 

I told him, three or four years. 

“Just so, just what we did!” he exclaimed. “We taught 
’em a bit, and, just as they were beginning to take it in, 
we took it all out again! We pumped our wells dry before 
they were a quarter full—we stripped our orchards 
while the apples were still in blossom—we applied the 
severe logic of arithmetic to our chickens, while peace¬ 
fully slumbering in their shells! Doubtless it’s the early 
bird that picks up the worm—but if the bird gets up so 
outrageously early that the worm is still deep under¬ 
ground, what then is its chance of a breakfast?” 

Not much, I admitted. 

“Now see how that works!” he went on eagerly. “If 
you want to pump your wells so soon—and I suppose you 
tell me that is what you must do ? ” 

"We must,” I said. “In an over-crowded country like 
this, nothing but Competitive Examinations-” 

Mein Herr threw up his hands wildly. “What, again!” 
he cried. "I thought it was dead, fifty years ago! Oh this 
Upas tree of Competitive Examinations! Beneath whose 
deadly shade all the original genius, all the exhaustive 
research, all the untiring life-long diligence by which our 
fore-fathers have so advanced human knowledge, must 
slowly but surely wither away, and give place to a system 
of Cookery, in which the human mind is a sausage, and 
all we ask is, how much indigestible stuff can be crammed 
into it!” 

Always, after these bursts of eloquence, he seemed to 
forget himself for a moment, and only to hold on to the 



FAIRY-MUSIC 


565 

thread of thought by some single word. “Yes, crammed," 
he repeated. “We went through all that stage of the dis¬ 
ease—had it bad, I warrant you! Of course, as the Exa¬ 
mination was all in all, we tried to put in just what was 
wanted—and the great thing to aim at was, that the 
Candidate should know absolutely nothing beyond the 
needs of the Examination! I don't say it was ever quite 
achieved: but one of my own pupils (pardon an old man's 
egotism) came very near it. After the Examination, he 
mentioned to me the few facts which he knew but had 
not been able to bring in, and I can assure you they were 
trivial, Sir, absolutely trivial!” 

I feebly expressed my surprise and delight. 

The old man bowed, with a gratified smile, and pro¬ 
ceeded. “At that time, no one had hit on the much more 
rational plan of watching for the individual scintillations 
of genius, and rewarding them as they occurred. As it 
was, we made our unfortunate pupil into a Leyden-jar, 
charged him up to the eyelids—then applied the knob of 
a Competitive Examination, and drew off one magnificent 
spark, which very often cracked the jar! What mattered 
that ? Ee labeled it ‘First Class Spark’, and put it away on 
the shelf.” 

“But the more rational system-?” I suggested. 

“Ah, yes! that came next. Instead of giving the whole 
reward of learning in one lump, we used to pay for every 
good answer as it occurred. How well I remember lec¬ 
turing in those days, with a heap of small coins at my 
elbow! It was ‘A very good answer, Mr. Jones!’ (that 
meant a shilling, mostly). ‘Bravo, Mr. Robinson!’ (that 
meant half-a-crown). Now I’ll tell you how that worked. 
Not one single fact would any of them take in, without 
a fee! And when a clever boy came up from school, he 
got paid more for learning than we got paid for teaching 
him! Then came the wildest craze of all.” 

“What, another craze?” I said. 

“It’s the last one,” said the old man. “I must have 
tired you out with my long story. Each College wanted to 



566 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

get the clever boys: so we adopted a system which we had 
heard was very popular in England: the Colleges com¬ 
peted against each other, and the boys let themselves out 
to the highest bidder! What geese we were! Why, they 
were bound to come to the University somehow. We 
needn’t have paid ’em! And all our money went in get¬ 
ting clever boys to come to one College rather than an¬ 
other! The competition was so keen, that at last mere 
money-payments were not enough. Any College, that 
wished to secure some specially clever young man, had 
to waylay him at the station, and hunt him through the 
streets. The first who touched him was allowed to have 
him.” 

"That hunting-down of the scholars, as they arrived, 
must have been a curious business,” I said. “Could you 
give me some idea of what it was like?” 

“Willingly!” said the old man. “I will describe to you 
the very last Hunt that took place, before that form of 
Sport (for it was actually reckoned among the Sports of 
the day: we called it ‘Cub-Hunting’) was finally aban¬ 
doned. I witnessed it myself, as I happened to be passing 
by at the moment, and was what we called ‘in at the 
death’. I can see it now!” he went on in an excited tone, 
gazing into vacancy with those large dreamy eyes of his 

“It seems like yesterday; and yet it happened-” He 

checked himself hastily, and the remaining words died 
away into a whisper. 

“How many years ago did you say?” I asked, much 
interested in the prospect of at last learning some definite 
fact in his history. 

“Many years ago,” he replied. “The scene at the Rail¬ 
way-Station had been (so they told me) one of wild 
excitement. Eight or nine Heads of Colleges had as¬ 
sembled at the gates (no one was allowed inside), and 
the Station-Master had drawn a line on the pavement, 
and insisted on their all standing behind it. The gates 
were flung open! The young man darted through them, 
and fled like lightning down the street, while the Heads 



FAIRY-MUSIC 


567 

of Colleges actually yelled with excitement on catching 
sight of him! The Proctor gave the word, in the old statu¬ 
tory form, ‘Semel! Bis! Ter! Cunite!’ , and the Hunt be¬ 
gan! Oh, it was a fine sight, believe me! At the first corner 
he dropped his Greek Lexicon: further on, his railway- 
rug: then various small articles: then his umbrella: lastly, 
what I suppose he prized most, his hand-bag; but the 
game was up: the spherical Principal of—of-” 

“Of which College?” I said. 

“—of one of the Colleges”, he resumed, “had put into 
operation the Theory—his own discovery—of Accelerated 
Velocity, and captured him just opposite to where I 
stood. I shall never forget that wild breathless struggle! 
But it was soon over. Once in those great bony hands, 
escape was impossible!” 

“May I ask why you speak of him as the ‘ spherical ’ 
Principal?” I said. 

“The epithet referred to his shape, which was a perfect 
sphere. You are aware that a bullet, another instance of 
a perfect sphere, when falling in a perfectly straight line, 
moves with Accelerated Velocity?” 

I bowed assent. 

“Well, my spherical friend (as I am proud to call him) 
set himself to investigate the causes of this. He found 
them to be three. One; that it is a perfect sphere. Two; 
that it moves in a straight line . Three; that its direction 
is not upwards. When these three conditions are fulfilled, 
you get Accelerated Velocity.” 

“Hardly,” I said: “if you will excuse my differing from 
you. Suppose we apply the theory to horizontal motion. 
If a bullet is fired horizontally, it-” 

“—it does not move in a straight line,” he quietly fin¬ 
ished my sentence for me. 

“I yield the point,” I said. "What did your friend do 
next?” 

“The next thing was to apply the theory, as you rightly 
suggest, to horizontal motion. But the moving body, ever 
tending to fall, needs constant support, if it is to move 



568 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

in a true horizontal line. ‘What, then,’ he asked himself, 
‘will give constant support to a moving body}’ And his 
answer was ‘ Human legsV That was the discovery that 
immortalized his name!” 

‘‘His name being-?” I suggested. 

‘‘I had not mentioned it,” was the gentle reply of my 
most unsatisfactory informant. ‘‘His next step was an 
obvious one. He took to a diet of suet-dumplings, until 
his body had become a perfect sphere. Then he went out for 
his first experimental run—which nearly cost him his life! ” 

“How was that}” 

“Well, you see, he had no idea of the tremendous new 
Force in Nature that he was calling into play. He began 
too fast. In a very few minutes he found himself moving 
at a hundred miles an hour! And, if he had not had the 
presence of mind to charge into the middle of a hay¬ 
stack (which he scattered to the four winds) there can be 
no doubt that he would have left the Planet he belonged 
to, and gone right away into Space!” 

“And how came that to be the last of the Cub-Hunts?” 
I enquired. 

“Well, you see, it led to a rather scandalous dispute 
between two of the Colleges. Another Principal had laid 
his hand on the young one, so nearly at the same moment 
as the spherical one, that there was no knowing which had 
touched him first. The dispute got into print, and did us 
no credit, and, in short, Cub-Hunts came to an end. Now 
I’ll tell you what cured us of that wild craze of ours, the 
bidding against each other, for the clever scholars, just as 
if they were articles to be sold by auction! Just when the 
craze had reached its highest point, and when one of the 
Colleges had actually advertised a Scholarship of one 
thousand pounds per annum, one of our tourists brought 
us the manuscript of an old African legend—I happen to 
have a copy of it in my pocket. Shall I translate it for 
you?” 

“Pray go on,” I said, though I felt I was getting very 
sleepy. 



Chapter XIII 


What Tottles Meant 

Mein Herr unrolled the manuscript, but, to my great 
surprise, instead of reading it, he began to sing it, in a 
rich mellow voice that seemed to ring through the room. 

"One thousand pounds per annuum 
Is not so had a figure, come!” 

Cried Tottles. “And I tell you, flat, 

A man may marry well on that! 

To say ‘the Husband needs the Wife’ 

Is not the way to represent it. 

The crowning joy of Woman’s life 
Is Man/” said Tottles (and he meant it). 

The blissful Honey-moon is past: 

The Pair have settled down at last: 

Mamma-in-law their home will share. 

And make their happiness her care. 

“ Your income is an ample one: 

Go it, my children!” (And they went it). 

"I rayther think this kind of fun 
Wo’n’t last!” said Tottles (and he meant it). 

They took a little country-box — 

A box at Covent Garden also: 

They lived a life of double-knocks, 

Acquaintances began to call so: 

Their London house was much the same 
(It took three hundred, clear, to rent it): 

“Life is a very jolly game!” 

Cried happy Tottles (and he meant it). 

"Contented with a frugal lot” 

(He always used that phrase at Gunter’s), 

He bought a handy little yacht — 

A dozen serviceable hunters — 

569 



570 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

The fishing of a Highland Loch — 

A sailing-boat to circumvent it — 

“ The sounding of that Gaelic ‘ och' 

Beats me!” said Tottles (and he meant it). 

Here, with one of those convulsive starts that wake 
one up in the very act of dropping off to sleep, I became 
conscious that the deep musical tones that thrilled me 
did not belong to Mein Herr, but to the French Count. 
The old man was still conning the manuscript. 

"I beg your pardon for keeping you waiting!” he said. 
“I was just making sure that I knew the English for all 
the words. I am quite ready now.” And he read me the 
following Legend: 

“In a city that stands in the very centre of Africa, and 
is rarely visited by the casual tourist, the people had al¬ 
ways bought eggs—a daily necessary in a climate where 
egg-flip was the usual diet—from a Merchant who came 
to their gates once a week. And the people always bid 
wildly against each other: so there was quite a lively 
auction every time the Merchant came, and the last egg 
in his basket used to fetch the value of two or three 
camels, or thereabouts. And eggs got dearer every week. 
And still they drank their egg-flip, and wondered where 
all their money went to. 

“And there came a day when they put their heads to¬ 
gether. And they understood what donkeys they had 
been. 

‘‘And next day, when the Merchant came, only one 
Man went forth. And he said ‘Oh, thou of the hook-nose 
and the goggle-eyes, thou of the measureless beard, how 
much for that lot of eggs ? ’ 

‘‘And the Merchant answered him ‘I could let thee have 
that lot at ten thousand piastres the dozen’. 

‘‘And the Man chuckled inwardly, and said ‘Ten 
piastres the dozen I offer thee, and no more, oh descen¬ 
dant of a distinguished grandfather!’ 

‘‘And the Merchant stroked his beard, and said ‘Hum! 



WHAT TOTTLES MEANT 571 

I will await the coming of thy friends/ So he waited. 
And the Man waited with him. And they waited both 
together." 

"The manuscript breaks off here," said Mein Herr, as 
he rolled it up again; "but it was enough to open our 
eyes. We saw what simpletons we had been—buying our 
Scholars much as those ignorant savages bought their 
eggs—and the ruinous system was abandoned. If only we 
could have abandoned, along with it, all the other fash¬ 
ions we had borrowed from you, instead of carrying them 
to their logical results! But it was not to be. What ruined 
my country, and drove me from my home, was the intro¬ 
duction—into the Army, of all places—of your theory 
of Political Dichotomy!" 

"Shall I trouble you too much," I said, "if I ask you 
to explain what you mean by ‘the Theory of Political 
Dichotomy’?” 

“No trouble at all!” was Mein Herr’s most courteous 
reply. "I quite enjoy talking, when I get so good a listener. 
What started the thing, with us, was the report brought 
to us, by one of our most eminent statesmen, who had 
stayed some time in England, of the way affairs were 
managed there. It was a political necessity (so he assured 
us, and we believed him, though we had never discovered 
it till that moment) that there should be two Parties, in 
every affair and on every subject. In Politics, the two 
Parties, which you had found it necessary to institute, 
were called, he told us, ‘Whigs’ and ‘Tories’." 

"That must have been some time ago?" I remarked. 

"It was some time ago," he admitted. "And this was 
the way the affairs of the British Nation were managed. 
(You will correct me if I misrepresent it. I do but repeat 
what our traveler told us.) These two Parties—which 
were in chronic hostility to each other—took turns in 
conducting the Government; and the Party, that hap¬ 
pened not to be in power, was called the ‘Opposition’, I 
believe?” 

“That is the right name,” I said. "There have always 



572 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

been, so long as we have had a Parliament at all, two 
Parties, one ‘in’, and one ‘out’.” 

‘‘Well, the function of the ‘Ins’ (if I may so call them) 
was to do the best they could for the national welfare— 
in such things as making war or peace, commercial 
treaties, and so forth?” 

■'Undoubtedly,” I said. 

“And the function of the ‘Outs’ was (so our traveler 
assured us, though we were very incredulous at first) to 
prevent the ‘Ins’ from succeeding in any of these things?” 

“To criticize and to amend their proceedings,” I cor¬ 
rected him. “It would be unpatriotic to hinder the Gov¬ 
ernment in doing what was for the good of the Nation! 
We have always held a Patriot to be the greatest of heroes, 
and an unpatriotic spirit to be one of the worst of human 
ills!” 

“Excuse me for a moment,” the old gentleman cour¬ 
teously replied, taking out his pocket-book. “I have a few 
memoranda here, of a correspondence I had with our 
tourist, and, if you will allow me. I'll just refresh my 
memory—although I quite agree with you—it is, as you 

say, one of the worst of human ills-” And, here Mein 

Herr began singing again. 

But oh, the worst of human ills 
(Poor Tottles found) are “little hills”! 

A nd, with no balance in the Bank 
What wonder that his spirits sank? 

Still, as the money flowed away, 

He wondered how on earth she spent it. 

“You cost me twenty pounds a day, 

At least!” cried Tottles (and he meant it). 

She sighed. “Those Drawing Rooms, you know! 

I really never thought about it: 

Mamma declared we ought to go — 

We should be Nobodies without it. 

That diamond-circlet for my brow — 

I quite believed that she had sent it, 



WHAT TOTTLES MEANT 


573 


Until the Bill came in just now -' 

‘‘Viper!” cried Tottles (and he meant it). 

Poor Mrs. T. could bear no more, 

But fainted flat upon the floor. 

Mamma-in-law, with anguish wild, 

Seeks, all in vain, to rouse her child. 

“Quick! Take this box of smelling-salts! 

Don’t scold her, James, or you’ll repent it. 

She’s a dear girl, with all her faults -” 

“She is/” groaned Tottles (and he meant it). 

“I was a donkey”, Tottles cried , 

■‘To choose your daughter for my bride! 

'Twas you that bid us cut a dash! 

’Tis you have brought us to this smash! 

You don’t suggest one single thing 

That can in any way prevent it - 

“ Then what's the use of arguing?” 

"Shut up!” cried Tottles (and he meant it). 

Once more I started into wakefulness, and realized that 
Mein Herr was not the singer. He was still consulting his 
memoranda. 

‘‘It is exactly what my friend told me,” he resumed, 
after conning over various papers. “ ‘ Unpatriotic ' is the 
very word I had used, in writing to him, and ‘ hinder ’ is 
the very word he used in his reply! Allow me to read you 
a portion of his letter: 

“ ‘I can assure you,’ he writes, ‘that, unpatriotic as you may 
think it, the recognized function of the ‘Opposition’ is to hinder 
in every manner not forbidden by the Law, the action of the 
Government. This process is called ‘Legitimate Obstruction’: 
and the greatest triumph the ‘Opposition’ can ever enjoy, is 
when they are able to point out that, owing to their ‘Obstruction’, 
the Government have failed in everything they have tried to do 
for the good of the Nation!’ ” 

"Your friend has not put it quite correctly,” I said. 
“The Opposition would no doubt be glad to point out 



574 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

that the Government had failed through their own fault 
but not that they had failed on account of Obstructionl” 

“You think so?” he gently replied. "Allow me now to 
read to you this newspaper-cutting, which my friend en¬ 
closed in his letter. It is part of the report of a public 
speech, made by a Statesman who was at the time a 
member of the 'Opposition': 

“ ‘At the close of the Session, he thought they had no reason 
to be discontented with the fortunes of the campaign. They had 
routed the enemy at every point. But the pursuit must be con¬ 
tinued. They had only to follow up a disordered and dispirited 
foe.’ ” 

“Now to what portion of your national history would 
you guess that the speaker was referring?” 

“Really, the number of successful wars we have waged 
during the last century”, I replied, with a glow of British 
pride, “is far too great for me to guess, with any chance 
of success, which it was we were then engaged in. How¬ 
ever. I will name ‘India’ as the most probable. The 
Mutiny was no doubt, all but crushed, at the time that 
speech was made. What a fine, manly, patriotic speech 
it must have been!” I exclaimed in an outburst of en¬ 
thusiasm. 

“You think so?” he replied, in a tone of gentle pity. 
“Yet my friend tells me that the ‘disordered and dispirited 
foe’ simply meant the Statesmen who happened to be 
in power at the moment; that the ' pursuit’ simply meant 
'Obstruction'; and that the words ‘they had routed the 
enemy’ simply meant that the 'Opposition' had succeeded 
in hindering the Government from doing any of the work 
which the Nation had empowered them to do!” 

I thought it best to say nothing. 

“It seemed queer to us, just at first,” he resumed, after 
courteously waiting a minute for me to speak: “but, when 
once we had mastered the idea, our respect for your Na¬ 
tion was so great that we carried it into every department 
of life! It was ‘the beginning of the end’ with us. My 



WHAT TOTTLES MEANT 575 

country never held up its head again!” And the poor old 
gentleman sighed deeply. 

“Let us change the subject,” I said. “Do not distress 
yourself, I beg!” 

“No, no!” he said, with an effort to recover himself. 
“I had rather finish my story! The next step (after re¬ 
ducing our Government to impotence, and putting a stop 
to all useful legislation, which did not take us long to do) 
was to introduce what we called ‘the glorious British 
Principle of Dichotomy’ into Agriculture. We persuaded 
many of the well-to-do farmers to divide their staff of 
labourers into two Parties, and to set them one against 
the other. They were called, like our political Parties, the 
‘Ins’ and the ‘Outs’: the business of the ‘Ins’ was to do 
as much of ploughing, sowing, or whatever might be 
needed, as they could manage in a day, and at night they 
were paid according to the amount they had done : the 
business of the ‘Outs’ was to hinder them, and they were 
paid for the amount they had hindered. The farmers 
found they had to pay only half as much wages as they 
did before, and they didn’t observe that the amount of 
work done was only a quarter as much as was done be¬ 
fore: so they took it up quite enthusiastically, at first” 

“And afterwards -?” I enquired. 

"Well, afterwards they didn’t like it quite so well. In 
a very short time, things settled down into a regular 
routine. No work at all was done. So the ‘Ins’ got no 
wages, and the ‘Outs’ got full pay. And the farmers never 
discovered, till most of them were ruined, that the rascals 
had agreed to manage it so, and had shared the pay be¬ 
tween them! While the thing lasted, there were funny 
sights to be seen! Why, I’ve often watched a ploughman, 
with two horses harnessed to the plough, doing his best 
to get it forwards', while the opposition-ploughman, with 
three donkeys harnessed at the other end, was doing his 
best to get it backwards\ And the plough never moving 
an inch, either way!” 

“But we never did anything like that\” I exclaimed. 



576 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“Simply because you were less logical than we were,” 
replied Mein Herr. “There is sometimes an advantage in 
being a donk—Excuse me! No personal allusion intended. 
All this happened long ago, you know!” 

“Did the Dichotomy-Principle succeed in any direc¬ 
tion?” I enquired. 

“In none,” Mein Herr candidly confessed. “It had a 
very short trial in Commerce. The shop-keepers wouldn’t 
take it up, after once trying the plan of having half the 
attendants busy in folding up and carrying away the 
goods which the other half were trying to spread out up¬ 
on the counters. They said the Public didn’t like it!” 

“I don’t wonder at it,” I remarked. 

"Well, we tried ‘the British Principle’ for some years. 

And the end of it all was-” His voice suddenly dropped, 

almost to a whisper; and large tears began to roll down 
his cheeks. “—the end was that we got involved in a war; 
and there was a great battle, in which we far out-num¬ 
bered the enemy. But what could one expect, when only 
half of our soldiers were fighting, and the other half 
pulling them back? It ended in a crushing defeat—an 
utter rout. This caused a Revolution; and most of the 
Government were banished. I myself was accused of 
Treason, for having so strongly advocated ‘the British 
Principle’. My property was all forfeited, and—and—I 
was driven into exile! ‘Now the mischief’s done,' they 
said, ‘perhaps you’ll kindly leave the country?’ It nearly 
broke my heart, but I had to go!” 

The melancholy tone became a wail: the wail became 
a chant: the chant became a song—though whether it 
was Mein Herr that was singing, this time, or somebody 
else, I could not feel certain. 

"And, now the mischief’s done, perhaps 
You’ll kindly go and pack your traps? 

Since two (y our daughter and your son) 

A re Company, but three are none. 

A course of saving we’ll begin: 

When change is needed, I’ll invent it. 



WHAT TOTTLES MEANT 577 

Don’t think to put your finger in 
This pie!” cried Tottles (and he meant it). 

The music seemed to die away. Mein Herr was again 
speaking in his ordinary voice. “Now tell me one thing 
more/’ he said. “Am I right in thinking that in your 
Universities, though a man may reside some thirty or 
forty years, you examine him, once for all, at the end of 
the first three or four?” 

“That is so, undoubtedly,” I admitted. 

“Practically, then, you examine a man at the beginning 
of his career!” the old man said to himself rather than 
to me. “And what guarantee have you that he retains the 
knowledge for which you have rewarded him—before¬ 
hand, as we should say?” 

“None,” I admitted, feeling a little puzzled at the drift 
of his remarks. “How do you secure that object?” 

“By examining him at the end of his thirty or forty 
years—not at the beginning,” he gently replied. “On an 
average, the knowledge then found is about one-fifth of 
what it was at first—the process of forgetting going on 
at a very steady uniform rate—and he, who forgets least, 
gets most honour, and most rewards.” 

“Then you give him the money when he needs it no 
longer? And you make him live most of his life on 
nothingl” 

“Hardly that. He gives his orders to the tradesmen: 
they supply him, for forty, sometimes fifty years, at their 
own risk: then he gets his Fellowship—whic^i pays him 
in one year as much as your Fellowships pay in fifty— 
and then he can easily pay all his bills, with interest.” 

“But suppose he fails to get his Fellowship? That must 
occasionally happen.” 

“That occasionally happens.” It was Mein Herr’s turn, 
now, to make admissions. 

“And what becomes of the tradesmen?” 

“They calculate accordingly. When a man appears to 
be getting alarmingly ignorant, or stupid, they will some- 



578 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

times refuse to supply him any longer. You have no idea 
with what enthusiasm a man will begin to rub up his 
forgotten sciences or languages, when his butcher has cut 
oh the supply of beef and mutton!” 

“And who are the Examiners?” 

“The young men who have just come, brimming over 
with knowledge. You would think it a curious sight,” he 
went on, “to see mere boys examining such old men. I 
have known a man set to examine his own grandfather. 
It was a little painful for both of them, no doubt. The 
old gentleman was as bald as a coot-” 

“How bald would that be?” I’ve no idea why I asked 
this question. I felt I was getting foolish. 


Chapter XIV 
Bruno’s Picnic 

“As bald as bald,” was the bewildering reply. “Now, 
Bruno, I’ll tell you a story.” 

“And I’ll tell oo a story,” said Bruno, beginning in a 
great hurry for fear of Sylvie getting the start of him: 
“once there were a Mouse—a little tiny Mouse—such a 
tiny little Mouse! Oo never saw such a tiny Mouse-” 

“Did nothing ever happen to it, Bruno?” I asked. 
“Haven’t you anything more to tell us, besides its being 
so tiny?” 

“Nothing never happened to it,” Bruno solemnly re¬ 
plied. 

“Why did nothing never happen to it?” said Sylvie, 
who was sitting, with her head on Bruno’s shoulder, 
patiently waiting for a chance of beginning her story. 

“It were too tiny,” Bruno explained. 

“ That’s no reason!” I said. “However tiny it was, 
things might happen to it.” 

Bruno looked pityingly at me, as if he thought me very 



BRUNO’S PICNIC 579 

stupid. “It were too tiny,” he repeated. “If anything hap¬ 
pened to it, it would die—it were so very tiny!" 

"Really that’s enough about its being tiny!” Sylvie put 
in. Haven’t you invented any more about it?” 

“Haven’t invented no more yet.” 

“Well, then, you shouldn’t begin a story till you’ve in¬ 
vented more! Now be quiet, there’s a good boy, and listen 
to my story.” 

And Bruno, having quite exhausted all his inventive 
faculty, by beginning in too great a hurry, quietly re¬ 
signed himself to listening. “Tell about the other Bruno, 
please,” he said coaxingly. 

Sylvie put her arms round his neck, and began:— 

“The wind was whispering among the trees,” (“That 
wasn’t good manners!” Bruno interrupted. “Never mind 
about manners,” said Sylvie) “and it was evening—a 
nice moony evening, and the Owls were hooting-" 

“Pretend they weren’t Owls!” Bruno pleaded, stroking 
her cheek with his fat little hand. “I don’t like Owls. 
Owls have such great big eyes. Pretend they were 
Chickens!” 

“Are you afraid of their great big eyes, Bruno?” I 
said. 

“Aren’t ’fraid of nothing,” Bruno answered in as care¬ 
less a tone as he could manage: “they’re ugly with their 
great big eyes. I think if they cried, the tears would be 
as big—oh, as big as the moon!” And he laughed merrily. 
"Doos Owls cry ever, Mister Sir?” 

“Owls cry never,” I said gravely, trying to copy Bruno’s 
way of speaking: “they’ve got nothing to be sorry for, 
you know.” 

“Oh, but they have!” Bruno exclaimed. “They’re ever 
so sorry, ’cause they killed the poor little Mouses!” 

“But they’re not sorry when they’re hungry, I sup¬ 
pose?” 

“Oo don't know nothing about Owls!” Bruno scorn¬ 
fully remarked. “When they’re hungry, they’re very, 
very sorry they killed the little Mouses, 'cause if they 



580 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

hadn’t killed them there’d be sumfin for supper, 00 
know!” 

Bruno was evidently getting into a dangerously inven¬ 
tive state of mind, so Sylvie broke in with “Now I'm go¬ 
ing on with the story. So the Owls—the Chickens, I mean 
—were looking to see if they could find a nice fat Mouse 
for their supper-” 

“Pretend it was a nice ’abbit!” said Bruno. 

“But it wasn’t a nice habit, to kill Mouses,” Sylvie 
argued. “I ca’n’t pretend that\” 

“I didn’t say 'habit', 00 silly fellow!” Bruno replied 
with a merry twinkle in his eye. “ 'abbits —that runs about 
in the fields!” 

“Rabbit? Well it can be a RabDit, if you like. But you 
mustn’t alter my story so much, Bruno. A Chicken 
couldn’t eat a Rabbit!” 

“But it might have wished to see if it could try to eat 
it.” 

“Well, it wished to see |f it could try—oh, really, Bruno, 
that’s nonsense! I shall go back to the Owls.” 

“Well, then, pretend they hadn’t great eyes!” 

"And they saw a little Boy,” Sylvie went on, disdaining 
to make any further corrections. “And he asked them to 

tell him a story. And the Owls hooted and flew away-” 

(“Oo shouldn’t say ‘fiewed’; 00 should say ‘filed ’Bruno 
whispered. But Sylvie wouldn’t hear.) “And he met a 
Lion. And he asked the Lion to tell him a story. And the 
Lion said ‘yes', it would. And, while the Lion was telling 
him the story, it nibbled some of his head off-” 

“Don’t say ‘nibbled’!” Bruno entreated. “Only little 
things nibble—little thin sharp things, with edges-” 

“Well, then, it ‘nubbled’,” said Sylvie. “And when it 
had nubbled all his head off, he went away, and he never 
said ‘thank you’!” 

“That were very rude,” said Bruno. “If he couldn’t 
speak, he might have nodded—no, he couldn’t nod. Well, 
he might have shaked hands with the Lion!” 

“Oh, I’d forgotten that part!” said Sylvie. “He did 



BRUNO'S PICNIC 


581 

shake hands with it. He came back again, you know, 
and he thanked the Lion very much, for telling him the 
story.” 

“Then his head had growed up again?” said Bruno. 

“Oh yes, it grew up in a minute. And the Lion begged 
pardon, and said it wouldn’t nubble off little boys’ heads 
—not never no more!” 

Bruno looked much pleased at this change of events 
“Now that are a really nice story!” he said. “ Aren’t it a 
nice story, Mister Sir?” 

“Very,” I said. “I would like to hear another story 
about that Boy.” 

“So would /,’ said Bruno, stroking Sylvie’s cheek 
again. “Please tell about Bruno’s Picnic; and don’t talk 
about nubbly Lions!” 

“I wo’n’t, if it frightens you,” said Sylvie. 

“Flightcns me!” Bruno exclaimed indignantly. “It isn’t 
thatl It’s ’cause ‘nubbly’ 's such a grumbly word to say— 
when one person’s got her head on another person’s shoul¬ 
der. When she talks like that,” he exclaimed to me, “the 
talking goes down bofe sides of my face—all the way to 
my chin—and it doos tickle so! It’s enough to make a 
beard grow, that it is!” 

He said this with great severity, but it was evidently 
meant for a joke: so Sylvie laughed—a delicious musical 
little laugh, and laid her soft cheek on the top of her 
brother’s curly head, as if it were a pillow, while she went 
on with the story. “So this Boy-” 

“But it wasn’t me, 00 know!” Bruno interrupted. “And 
00 needn’t try to look as if it was, Mister Sir!” 

I represented, respectfully, that I was trying to look as 
if it wasn’t. 

“—he was a middling good Boy-” 

“He were a welly good Boy!” Bruno corrected her. 
“And he never did nothing he wasn’t told to do-” 

"That doesn’t make a good Boy!” Sylvie said con¬ 
temptuously. 

"That do make a good Boy!” Bruno insisted. 



582 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

Sylvie gave up the point. "Well, he was a very good 
Boy, and he always kept his promises, and he had a big 
cupboard-” 

"—for to keep all his promises in!” cried Bruno. 

"If he kept all his promises,” Sylvie said, with a mis¬ 
chievous look in her eyes, "he wasn’t like some Boys I 
know of!” 

"He had to put salt with them, a-course,” Bruno said 
gravely: "00 ca’n't keep promises when there isn’t any 
salt. And he kept his birthday on the second shelf.” 

"How long did he keep his birthday?” I asked. “I 
never can keep mine more than twenty-four hours.” 

"Why, a birthday stays that long by itself!” cried 
Bruno. "Oo doosn’t know how to keep birthdays! This 
Boy kept his a whole year!” 

"And then the next birthday would begin,” said 
Sylvie. "So it would be his birthday always” 

"So it were,” said Bruno. "Doos 00 have treats on oor 
birthday, Mister Sir?” 

"Sometimes,” I said. 

"When 00’re good, I suppose?” 

"Why, it is a sort of treat, being good, isn’t it?” I 
said. 

"A sort of treatY' Bruno repeated. "It’s a sort of punish¬ 
ment, I think!” 

"Oh, Bruno!” Sylvie interrupted, almost sadly. "How 
can you?” 

"Well, but it is,” Bruno persisted. "Why, look here, 
Mister Sir! This is being good!” And he sat bolt upright, 
and put on an absurdly solemn face. "First 00 must sit 
up as straight as pokers-” 

"—as a poker,” Sylvie corrected him. 

"—as straight as pokers,” Bruno firmly repeated. "Then 
00 must clasp oor hands— so. Then—‘Why hasn’t 00 
brushed oor hair? Go and brush it torecklyV Then—‘Oh, 
Bruno, 00 mustn’t dog’s-ear the daisies!’ Did 00 learn oor 
spelling wiz daisies, Mister Sir?” 

"I want to hear about that Boy’s Birthday,” I said. 



bruno's picnic 


583 

Bruno returned to the story instantly. "Well, so this 
Boy said ‘Now it’s my Birthday!’ And so—I’m tired!” he 
suddenly broke off, laying his head in Sylvie’s lap. "Sylvie 
knows it best. Sylvie’s grown-upper than me. Go on, 
Sylvie!” 

Sylvie patiently took up the thread of the story again. 
"So he said ‘Now it’s my Birthday. Whatever shall I do 
to keep my Birthday?’ All good little Boys—” (Sylvie 
turned away from Bruno, and made a great pretence of 
whispering to me) “—all good little Boys—Boys that 
learn their lessons quite perfect—they always keep their 
birthdays, you know. So of course this little Boy kept his 
Birthday.” 

“Oo may call him Bruno, if 00 like,” the little fellow 
carelessly remarked. "It weren’t me, but it makes it more 
interesting.” 

"So Bruno said to himself ‘The properest thing to do 
is to have a Picnic, all by myself, on the top of the hill. 
And I’ll take some Milk and some Bread, and some 
Apples: and first and foremost, I want some MilkV So, 
first and foremost, Bruno took a milk-pail-” 

"And he went and milkted the Cow!” Bruno put in. 

“Yes,” said Sylvie, meekly accepting the new verb. 
"And the Cow said ‘Moo! What are you going to do with 
all that Milk?’ And Bruno said ‘Please’m, I want it for 
my Picnic.’ And the Cow said ‘Moo! But I hope you 
wo’n’t boil any of it?’ And Bruno said ‘No, indeed I 
wo’n’t! New Milk’s so nice and so warm, it wants no 
boiling!’ ” 

"It doesn’t want no boiling,” Bruno offered as an 
amended version. 

"So Bruno put the Milk in a bottle. And then Bruno 
said ‘Now I want some Bread!’ So he went to the 
Oven, and he took out a delicious new Loaf. And the 
Oven-”. 

"—ever so light and so puffy!” Bruno impatiently cor¬ 
rected her. "Oo shouldn’t leave out so many words!” 

Sylvie humbly apologized. “—a delicious new Loaf, 



584 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

ever so light and so puffy. And the Oven said-” Here 

Sylvie made a long pause. “Really I don’t know what an 
Oven begins with, when it wants to speak!” 

Both children looked appealingly at me; but I could 
only say, helplessly, “I haven’t the least idea! I never 
heard an Oven speak!” 

For a minute or two we all sat silent; and then Bruno 
said, very softly, “Oven begins wiz 'O’.” 

“Good little boy!” Sylvie exclaimed. “He does his spell¬ 
ing very nicely. He’s cleverer than he knows!” she added, 
aside, to me. “So the Oven said ‘O! What are you going 
to do with all that Bread?' And Bruno said ‘Please—’ 
Is an Oven ‘Sir’ or ‘’m’, would you say?” She looked to 
me for a reply. 

“Both, I think,” seemed to me the safest thing to say. 

Sylvie adopted the suggestion instantly. “So Bruno 
said ‘Please, Sirm, I want it for my Picnic.’ And the Oven 
said ‘ 0 ! But I hope you wo’n’t toast any of it?’ And Bruno 
said, ‘No, indeed I wo’n’t! New Bread’s so light and so 
puffy, it wants no toasting!' ” 

“It never doesn’t want no toasting,” said Bruno. “I 
wiss 00 wouldn’t say it so short!” 

“So Bruno put the Bread in the hamper. Then Bruno 
said ‘Now I want some Apples!’ So he took the hamper, 
and he went to the Apple-Tree, and he picked some 

lovely ripe Apples. And the Apple-Tree said-” Here 

followed another long pause. 

Bruno adopted his favourite expedient of tapping his 
forehead; while Sylvie gazed earnestly upwards, as if she 
hoped for some suggestion from the birds, who were 
singing merrily among the branches overhead. But no 
result followed. 

“What does an Apple-Tree begin with, when it wants 
to speak?” Sylvie murmured despairingly, to the irre¬ 
sponsive birds. 

At last, taking a leaf out of Bruno’s book, I ventured 
on a remark. “Doesn’t ‘Apple-Tree’ always begin with 
Eh!’?” 



BRUNO’S PICNIC 


585 

“Why, of course it does! How clever of you!” Sylvie 
cried delightedly. 

Bruno jumped up, and patted me on the head. I tried 
not to feel conceited. 

“So the Apple-Tree said ‘Eh! What are you going to 
do with all those Apples?’ And Bruno said ‘Please, Sir, I 
want them for my Picnic.’ And the Apple-Tree said ‘Eh! 
But I hope you wo’n’t bake any of them?’ And Bruno 
said ‘No, indeed I wo’n’t! Ripe Apples are so nice and so 
sweet, they want no baking!’ ” 

“They never doesn’t-” Bruno was beginning, but 

Sylvie corrected herself before he could get the words out. 

“ ‘They never doesn’t nohow want no baking.’ So 
Bruno put the Apples in the hamper, along with the 
Bread, and the bottle of Milk. And he set off to have a 
Picnic, on the top of the hill, all by himself-” 

“He wasn’t greedy, 00 know, to have it all by himself,” 
Bruno said, patting me on the cheek to call my atten¬ 
tion; “ 'cause he hadn’t got no brothers and sisters.” 

“It was very sad to have no sisters, wasn’t it?” I said. 

“Well, I don't know,” Bruno said thoughtfully; “ ’cause 
he hadn’t no lessons to do. So he didn't mind.” 

Sylvie went on. “So, as he was walking along the road, 
he heard behind him such a curious sort of noise—a sort 
of a Thump! Thump! Thump! ‘Whatever is that?’ said 
Bruno. ‘Oh, I know!’ said Bruno. ‘Why, it’s only my 
Watch a-ticking!’ ” 

"Were it his Watch a-ticking?” Bruno asked me, with 
eyes that fairly sparkled with mischievous delight. 

“No doubt of it!” I replied. And Bruno laughed exul- 
tingly. 

“Then Bruno thought a little harder. And he said 
‘No! it ca’n’t be my Watch a-ticking; because I haven’t 
go* a Watch!”’ 

Bruno peered up anxiously into my face, to see how I 
took it. I hung my head, and put a thumb into my 
mouth, to the evident delight of the little fellow. 

“So Bruno went a little further along the road. And 



5 86 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

then he heard it again, that queer noise—Thump! 
Thump! Thump! ‘Whatever is that?’ said Bruno. ‘Oh, I 
know!’ said Bruno. ‘Why, it’s only the Carpenter a- 
mending my Wheelbarrow!' ” 

“Were it the Carpenter a-mending his Wheelbarrow?" 
Bruno asked me. 

I brightened up, and said “It must have been!’’ in a 
tone of absolute conviction. 

Bruno threw his arms round Sylvie's neck. “Sylvie!” 
he said, in a perfectly audible whisper. “He says it must 
have been!” 

“Then Bruno thought a little harder. And he said ‘No! 
It ca'n't be the Carpenter a-mending my Wheelbarrow, 
because I haven’t got a Wheelbarrow!’ ” 

This time I hid my face in my hands, quite unable to 
meet Bruno’s look of triumph. 

“So Bruno went a little further along the road. And 
then he heard that queer noise again—Thump! Thump! 
Thump! So he thought he’d look round, this time, just 
to see what it was. And what should it be but a great 
Lion!” 

“A great big Lion,” Bruno corrected her. 

“A great big Lion. And Bruno was ever so frightened, 
and he ran-” 

“No, he wasn’t jlightened a bit!” Bruno interrupted. 
(He was evidently anxious for the reputation of his name¬ 
sake.) “He runned away to get a good look at the Lion; 
'cause he wanted to see if it were the same Lion what 
used to nubble little Boys' heads off; and he wanted to 
know how big it was!” 

"Well, he ran away, to get a good look at the Lion. 
And the Lion trotted slowly after him. And the Lion 
called after him, in a very gentle voice, ‘Little Boy, little 
Boy! You needn’t be afraid of mel I’m a very gentle old 
Lion now. I never nubble little Boys' heads off, as I used 
to do.’ And so Bruno said ‘Don’t you really, Sir? (Then 
what do you live on?’ And the Lion-” 

“Oo see he weren’t a bit flightened!” Bruno said to me 



BRUNO’S PICNIC 587 

patting my cheek again. “ 'cause he remembered to call 
it 'Sir', 00 know." 

I said that no doubt that was the real test whether a 
person was frightened or not. 

"And the Lion said ‘Oh, I live on bread-and-butter, and 
cherries, and marmalade, and plum-cake—’ ” 

"—and applesV’ Bruno put in. 

"Yes, 'and apples'. And Bruno said ‘Wo’n’t you come 
with me to my Picnic?' And the Lion said ‘Oh, I should 
like it very much indeed !’ And Bruno and the Lion went 
away together.” Sylvie stopped suddenly. 

"Is that all}” I asked, despondingly. 

“Not quite all,” Sylvie slily replied “There’s a sentence 
or two more. Isn’t there, Bruno?” 

"Yes,” with a carelessness that was evidently put on: 
"just a sentence or two more.” 

"And, as they were walking along, they looked over 
a hedge, and who should they see but a little black Lamb! 

And the Lamb was ever so frightened. And it ran-” 

“It were really flightened!” Bruno put in. 

“It ran away. And Bruno ran after it. And he called 
‘Little Lamb! You needn’t be afraid of this Lion! It 
never kills things! It lives on cherries, and marmalade—’ ” 
"—and applesV ’ said Bruno. 'Oo always forgets the 
apples!” 

“And Bruno said ‘Wo’n’t you come with us to my 
Picnic?' And the Lamb said ‘Oh, I should like it very 
much indeed, if my Ma will let me!' And Bruno said 
‘Let’s go and ask your Ma!’ And they went to the old 
Sheep. And Bruno said ‘Please, may your little Lamb 
come to my Picnic?’ And the Sheep said ‘Yes, if it’s 
learnt all its lessons.’ And the Lamb said ‘Oh yes, Ma! 
I’ve learnt all my lessons!’ ” 

“Pretend it hadn’t any lessons!” Bruno earnestly 
pleaded. 

"Oh, that would never do!” said Sylvie. "I ca’n’t leave 
out all about the lessons! And the old Sheep said ‘Do 
you know your ABC yet? Have you learnt A?’ And the 



588 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

Lamb said ‘Oh yes, Ma! I went to the A-field, and I 
helped them to make A!’ ‘Very good, my child! And have 
you learnt BP’ ‘Oh yes, Ma! I went to the B-hive, and the 
B gave me some honey!’ ‘Very good, my child! And have 
you learnt CP’ ‘Oh yes, Ma! I went to the C-side, and I saw 
the ships sailing on the C!’ ‘Very good, my child! You 
may go to Bruno’s Picnic.’ ” 

"So they set off. And Bruno walked in the middle, so 
that the Lamb mightn’t see the Lion-” 

"It were flightened ,” Bruno explained. 

"Yes, and it trembled so; and it got paler and paler; 
and, before they’d got to the top of the hill, it was a white 
little Lamb—as white as snow!” 

"But Bruno weren’t flightened!” said the owner of 
that name. “So he staid black!” 

"No, he didn’t stay black! He staid pink\” laughed 
Sylvie. "I shouldn’t kiss you like this, you know, if you 
were blackV ’ 

"Oo’d have to!” Bruno said with great decision. "Be¬ 
sides, Bruno wasn’t Bruno, oo know—I mean, Bruno 
wasn’t me —I mean—don’t talk nonsense, Sylvie!” 

"I wo’n’t do it again!” Sylvie said very humbly. “And 
so, as they went along, the Lion said ‘Oh, I’ll tell you 
what I used to do when I was a young Lion. I used to 
hide behind trees, to watch for little Boys.’ ” (Bruno 
cuddled a little closer to her.) “ ‘And, if a little thin 
scraggy Boy came by, why, I used to let him go. But, if 
a little fat juicy-' ” 

Bruno could bear no more. "Pretend he wasn’t juicy!” 
he pleaded, half-sobbing. 

"Nonsense, Bruno!” Sylvie briskly replied. "It'll be 
done in a moment! ‘—if a little fat juicy Boy came by, 
why, I used to spring out and gobble him up! Oh, you’ve 
no idea what a delicious thing it is—a little juicy Boy!’ 
And Bruno said ‘Oh, if you please. Sir, don’t talk about 
eating little boys! It makes me so shiveryV ” 

The real Bruno shivered, in sympathy with the hero. 

"And the Lion said ‘Oh, well, we wo’n’t talk about it, 



1 HE LITTLE FOXES 589 

then! I'll tell you what happened on my wedding- 
day—’ 

"I like this part better,” said Bruno, patting my cheek 
to keep me awake. 

“ ‘There was, oh, such a lovely wedding-breakfast! At 
one end of the table there was a large plum-pudding. 
And at the other end there was a nice roasted Lambl 
Oh, you’ve no idea what a delicious thing it is—a nice 
roasted Lamb!’ And the Lamb said ‘Oh, if you please, 
Sir, don’t talk about eating Lambs! It makes me so 
shivery !’ And the Lion said ‘Oh, well, we wo’n't talk 
about it, then!’ ” 


Chapter XV 
The Little Foxes 

“So, when they got to the top of the hill, Bruno opened 
the hamper: and he took out the Bread, and the Apples, 
and the Milk: and they ate, and they drank. And when 
they’d finished the Milk, and eaten half the Bread and 
half the Apples, the Lamb said ‘Oh, my paws is so sticky! 
I want to wash my paws!’ And the Lion said ‘Well, go 
down the hill, and wash them in the brook, yonder. 
We’ll wait for you!’ ’’ 

“It never corned back!’’ Bruno solemnly whispered to 
me. 

But Sylvie overheard him. “You’re not to whisper, 
Bruno! It spoils the story! And when the Lamb had been 
gone a long time, the Lion said to Bruno ‘Do go and 
see after that silly little Lamb! It must have lost its way.’ 
And Bruno went down the hill. And when he got to 
the brook, he saw the Lamb sitting on the bank: and 
who should be sitting by it but an old Fox!’ 

‘Don’t know who should be sitting by it,’’ Bruno 



590 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

said thoughtfully to himself. “A old Fox were sitting 
by it.” 

"And the old Fox were saying,” Sylvie went on, for 
once conceding the grammatical point. “ ‘Yes, my dear, 
you’ll be ever so happy with us, if you'll only come and 
see us! I’ve got three little Foxes there, and we do love 
little Lambs so dearly!' And the Lamb said ‘But you 
never eat them, do you, Sir?’ And the Fox said ‘Oh, no! 
What, eat a Lamb? We never dream of doing such a 
thing!’ So the Lamb said ‘Then I’ll come with you.’ And 
off thev went, hand in hand." 

"That Fox were welly extremely wicked, weren’t it?” 
said Bruno. 

"No, no!” said Sylvie, rather shocked at such violent 
language. "It wasn’t quite so bad as that!” 

"Well, I mean, it wasn’t nice,” the little fellow cor¬ 
rected himself. 

"And so Bruno went back to the Lion. ‘Oh, come 
quick!’ he said. ‘The Fox has taken the Lamb to his 
house with him! I’m sure he means to eat it!’ And the 
Lion said ‘I’ll come as quick as ever I can!’ And they 
trotted down the hill.” 

“Do oo think he caught the Fox, Mister Sir?” said 
Bruno. I shook my head, not liking to speak: and Sylvie 
went on. 

"And when they got to the house, Bruno looked in at 
the window. And there he saw the three little Foxes sit¬ 
ting round the table, with their clean pinafores on, and 
spoons in their hands-" 

"Spoons in their hands!” Bruno repeated in an ecstasy 
of delight. 

"And the Fox had got a great big knife—all ready to 

kill the poor little Lamb-” ("Oo needn't be flightened. 

Mister Sir!” Bruno put in, in a hasty whisper.) 

"And just as he was going to do it, Bruno heard a 

great ROAR-” (The real Bruno put his hand into 

mine, and held tight), "and the Lion came bang through 
the door, and the next moment it had bitten off the old 



THE LITTLE FOXES 59I 

Fox’s head! And Bruno jumped in at the window, and 
went leaping round the room, and crying out ‘Hooray! 
Hooray! The old Fox is dead! The old Fox is dead!’ " 

Bruno got up in some excitement. “May I do it now?” 
he enquired. 

Sylvie was quite decided on this point. “Wait till after¬ 
wards,” she said. “The speeches come next, don’t you 
know? You always love the speeches, don't you?” 

“Yes, I doos,” said Bruno: and sat down again. 

“The Lion’s speech. ‘Now, you silly little Lamb, go 
home to your mother, and never listen to old Foxes 
again. And be very good and obedient.’ ” 

“The Lamb’s speech. ‘Oh, indeed, Sir, I will, Sir!’ and 
the Lamb went away.” (“But oo needn’t go away!” 
Bruno explained. “It's quite the nicest part—what’s 
coming now!” Sylvie smiled. She liked having an appreci¬ 
ative audience.) 

“The Lion’s speech to Bruno. ‘Now, Bruno, take those 
little Foxes home with you, and teach them to be good 
obedient little Foxes! Not like that wicked old thing 
there, that’s got no head!’ ” (“That hasn’t got no head,” 
Bruno repeated.) 

“Bruno's speech to the Lion. 'Oh, indeed. Sir, I will, 
Sir!' And the Lion went away.” (“It gets betterer and 
betterer, now,” Bruno whispered to me, "right away to 
the end!”) 

“Bruno’s speech to the little Foxes. ‘Now, little Foxes, 
you’re going to have your first lesson in being good. I’m 
going to put you into the hamper, along with the Apples 
and the Bread: and you’re not to eat the Apples: and 
you’re not to eat the Bread: and you’re not to eat any¬ 
thing —till we get to my house: and then you’ll have your 
supper.’ ” 

“The little Foxes’ speech to Bruno. The little Foxes 
said nothing. 

“So Bruno put the Apples into the hamper—and the 
little Foxes—and the Bread—” (“They had picnicked 
all the Milk,” Bruno explained in a whisper) “—and he 



592 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

set off to go to his house." ("We’re getting near the end 
now,” said Bruno.) 

"And, when he had got a little way, he thought he 
would look into the hamper, and see how the little Foxes 
were getting on." 

"So he opened the door-” said Bruno. 

"Oh, Bruno!” Sylvie exclaimed, " you're not telling the 
story! So he opened the door, and behold, there were no 
Apples! So Bruno said ‘Eldest little Fox, ha ve you been 
eating the Apples?’ And the eldest little Fox said ‘No 
no no!’ ” (It is impossible to give the tone in which Sylvie 
repeated this rapid little ‘No no no!’ The nearest I can 
come to it is to say that it was much as if a young and 
excited duck had tried to quack the words. It was too 
quick for a quack, and yet too harsh to be anything else.) 
“Then he said ‘Second little Fox, have you been eating 
the Apples?’ And the second little Fox said ‘No no no!' 
Then he said ‘Youngest little Fox, haveyow been eating 
the Apples?’ And the youngest little Fox tried to say 
‘No no no!' but its mouth was so full, it couldn't, and it 
only said ‘Wauch! Wauch! Wauch!’ And Bruno looked 
into its mouth. And its mouth was full of Apples! And 
Bruno shook his head, and he said ‘Oh dear, oh dear! 
What bad creatures these Foxes are!’ ” 

Bruno was listening intently: and, when Sylvie paused 
to take breath, he could only just gasp out the words 
"About the Bread?" 

"Yes,” said Sylvie, "the Bread comes next. So he shut 
the door again; and he went a little further; and then 
he thought he’d just peep in once more. And behold, 
there was no Bread!” ("What do ‘behold’ mean}” said 
Bruno. "Hush!” said Sylvie.) "And he said ‘Eldest little 
Fox, have you been eating the Bread?’ And the eldest 
little Fox said ‘No no no!’ ‘Second little Fox, have you 
been eating the Bread?’ And the second little Fox only 
said ‘Wauch! Wauch! Wauch!’ And Bruno looked into 
its mouth, and its mouth was full of Bread!” ("It might 
have chokeded it,” said Bruno.) "So he said ‘Oh dear, 



THE LITTLE FOXES 593 

oh dear! What shall I do with these Foxes?' And he went 
a little further." ("Now comes the most interesting part," 
Bruno whispered.) 

"And when Bruno opened the hamper again, what do 
you think he saw?” ("Only two Foxes!” Bruno cried in 
a great hurry.) “You shouldn’t tell it so quick. However, 
he did see only two Foxes. And he said ‘Eldest little Fox, 
have you been eating the youngest little Fox?’ And the 
eldest little Fox said ‘No no no!’ ‘Second little Fox, have 
you been eating the youngest little Fox?’ And the second 
little Fox did its very best to say ‘No no no!’ but it could 
only say ‘Weuchk! Weuchk! Weuchk!’ And when Bruno 
looked into its mouth, it was half full of Bread, and half 
full of Fox!” (Bruno said nothing in the pause this time. 
He was beginning to pant a little, as he knew the crisis 
was coming.) 

"And when he’d got nearly home, he looked once more 
into the hamper, and he saw-” 

“Only-” Bruno began, but a generous thought 

struck him, and he looked at me. “Oo may say it, this 
time. Mister Sir!” he whispered. It was a noble offer, but 
I wouldn’t rob him of the treat. “Go on, Bruno,” I said, 
"you say it much the best.” “Only—but— one —Fox!” 
Bruno said with great solemnity. 

“ ‘Eldest little Fox,’ ” Sylvie said, dropping the narra¬ 
tive-form in her eagerness, “ ‘you’ve been so good that 
I can hardly believe you've been disobedient: but I’m 
afraid you’ve been eating your little sister?’ And the 
eldest little Fox said ‘Whihuauch! Whihuauch!’ and then 
it choked. And Bruno looked into its mouth, and it was 
full!” (Sylvie paused to take breath, and Bruno lay back 
among the daisies, and looked at me triumphantly. “Isn’t 
it grand, Mister Sir?” said he. I tried hard to assume a 
critical tone. "It’s grand,” I said: "but it frightens one 
so!” “Oo may sit a little closer to me, if oo like,” said 
Bruno.) 

“And so Bruno went home: and took the hamper into 
the kitchen, and opened it. And he saw-” Sylvie 

L.C. 


U 



594 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

looked at me, this time, as if she thought I had been 
rather neglected and ought to be allowed one guess, at 
any rate. 

“He ca’n’t guess!” Bruno cried eagerly. “I ’fraid I must 
tell him! There weren’t —nnffin in the hamper!” I shiv¬ 
ered in terror, and Bruno clapped his hands with delight. 
“He is flightened, Sylvie! Tell the rest!” 

“So Bruno said ‘Eldest little Fox, have you been eating 
yourself, you wicked little Fox?’ And the eldest little 
Fox said ‘Whihuauch!’ And then Bruno saw there was 
only its mouth in the hamper! So he took the mouth, and 
he opened it, and shook, and shook! And at last he shook 
the little Fox out of its own mouth! And then he said 
‘Open your mouth again, you wicked little thing!’ And 
he shook, and shook! And he shook out the second little 
Fox! And he said ‘Now open your mouth!’ And he shook, 
and shook! And he shook out the youngest little Fox, 
and all the Apples, and all the Bread! 

“And then Bruno stood the little Foxes up against the 
wall: and he made them a little speech. ‘Now, little Foxes, 
you’ve begun very wickedly—and you’ll have to be pun¬ 
ished. First you’ll go up to the nursery, and wash your 
faces, and put on clean pinafores. Then you’ll hear the 
bell ring for supper. Then you’ll come down: and you 
wo’n’t have any supper, but you’ll have a good whipping ! 
Then you’ll go to bed. Then in the morning you’ll hear 
the bell ring for breakfast. But you wo’n’t have any break¬ 
fast! You’ll have a good whipping\ Then you’ll have your 
lessons. And, perhaps, if you’re very good, when dinner¬ 
time comes, you’ll have a little dinner, and no more 
whipping!’ ” (“How very kind he was!” I whispered to 
Bruno. “Middling kind,” Bruno corrected me gravely.) 

“So the little Foxes ran up to the nursery. And soon 
Bruno went into the hall, and rang the big bell. ‘Tingle, 
tingle, tingle! Supper, supper, supper!’ Down came the 
little Foxes, in such a hurry for their supper! Clean pina¬ 
fores! Spoons in their hands! And, when they got into 
the dining-room, there was ever such a white table-cloth 



THE LITTLE FOXES 


595 

on the table! But there was nothing on it but a big whip. 
And they had such a whipping!" (I put my handkerchief 
to my eyes, and Bruno hastily climbed upon my knee 
and stroked my face. "Only one more whipping, Mister 
Sir!" he whispered. "Don’t cry more than oo ca’n’t help!”) 

"And the next morning early, Bruno rang the big bell 
again. ‘Tingle, tingle, tingle! Breakfast, breakfast, break¬ 
fast!’ Down came the little Foxes! Clean pinafores! 
Spoons in their hands! No breakfast! Only the big whip! 
Then came lessons,” Sylvie hurried on, for I still had my 
handkerchief to my eyes. “And the little Foxes were ever 
so good! And they learned their lessons backwards, and 
forwards, and upside-down. And at last Bruno rang the 
big bell again. ‘Tingle, tingle, tingle! Dinner, dinner, 

dinner!' And when the little Foxes came down-” 

("Had they clean pinafores on?" Bruno enquired. "Of 
course!” said Sylvie. "And spoons?” "Why, you know 
they had!” "Couldn’t be certain," said Bruno.) "— they 
came as slow as slow! And they said ‘Oh! There’ll be no 
dinner! There’ll only be the big whip!’ But, when they 
got into the room, they saw the most lovely dinner!” 
("Buns?” cried Bruno, clapping his hands.) "Buns, and 

cake, and-” ("—and jam?” said Bruno.) "Yes, jam— 

and soup—and-” (“—and sugar piums\" Bruno put 

in once more; and Sylvie seemed satisfied.) 

"And ever after that, they were such good little Foxes! 
They did their lessons as good as gold—and they never 
did what Bruno told them not to—and they never ate 
each other any more—and they never ate themselvesV 

The story came to an end so suddenly, it almost took 
my breath away; however I did my best to make a pretty 
speech of thanks. “I’m sure it’s very—very—very much 
so, I’m sure!” I seemed to hear myself say. 



Chapter XVI 


Beyond These Voices 

“I didn't quite catch what you said!” were the next 
words that reached my ear, but certainly not in the voice 
either of Sylvie or of Bruno, whom I could just see, 
through the crowd of guests, standing by the piano, and 
listening to the Count’s song. Mein Herr was the speaker. 
“I didn’t quite catch what you said!” he repeated. “But 
I’ve no doubt you take my view of it. Thank you very 
much for your kind attention. There is only but one verse 
left to be sung!” These last words were not in the gentle 
voice of Mein Herr, but in the deep bass of the French 
Count. And, in the silence that followed; the final stanza 
of “Tottles” rang through the room. 

See now this couple settled down 
In quiet lodgings, out of town: 

Submissively the tearful wife 
Accepts a plain and humble life: 

Yet begs one boon on bended knee: 

“My ducky-darling, don't resent it! 

Mamma might come for two or three -” 

"NEVER!"yelled Tottles. And he meant it. 

The conclusion of the song was followed by quite a 
chorus of thanks and compliments from all parts of the 
room, which the gratified singer responded to by bowing 
low in all directions. “It is to me a great privilege”, he 
said to Lady Muriel, “to have met with this so marvellous 
a song. The accompaniment to him is so strange, so mys¬ 
terious: it is as if a new music were to be invented! I 
will play him once again so as that to show you what I 
mean.” He returned to the piano, but the song had 
vanished. 

The bewildered singer searched through the heap of 
music lying on an adjoining table, but it was not there, 
either. Lady Muriel helped in the search: others soon 

596 



BEYOND THESE VOICES 597 

joined: the excitement grew. “What can have become of 
it?” exclaimed Lady Muriel. Nobody knew: one thing 
only was certain, that no one had been near the piano 
since the Count had sung the last verse of the song. 

“Nevare mind him!” he said, most good-naturedly. “I 
shall give it you with memory alone!” He sat down, and 
began vaguely fingering the notes; but nothing resembling 
the tune came out. Then he, too, grew excited. “But 
what oddness! How much of singularity! That I might 
lose, not the words alone, but the tune also—that is quite 
curious, I suppose?” 

We all supposed it, heartily. 

“It was that sweet little boy, who found it for me,” the 
Count suggested. “Quite perhaps he is the thief?” 

“Of course he is!” cried Lady Muriel. “Bruno! Where 
are you, my darling?” 

But no Bruno replied: it seemed that the two children 
had vanished as suddenly, and as mysteriously, as the 
song. 

“They are playing us a trick?” Lady Muriel gaily ex¬ 
claimed. “This is only an ex tempore game of Hide-and- 
Seek! That little Bruno is an embodied Mischief!” 

The suggestion was a welcome one to most of us, for 
some of the guests were beginning to look decidedly un¬ 
easy. A general search was set on foot with much en¬ 
thusiasm: curtains were thrown back and shaken, cup¬ 
boards opened, and ottomans turned over; but the num¬ 
ber of possible hiding-places proved to be strictly limited; 
and the search came to an end almost as soon as it had 
begun. 

“They must have run out, while we were wrapped up 
in the song,” Lady Muriel said, addressing herself to the 
Count, who seemed more agitated than the others; “and 
no doubt they’ve found their way back to the house¬ 
keeper’s room.” 

“Not by this door!” was the earnest protest of a knot 
of two or three gentlemen, who had been grouped round 
the door (one of them actually leaning against itl for the 



598 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

last half-hour, as they declared. “This door has not been 
opened since the song began!” 

An uncomfortable silence followed this announcement. 
Lady Muriel ventured no further conjectures, but quietly 
examined the fastenings of the windows, which opened as 
doors. They all proved to be well fastened, inside. 

Not yet at the end of her resources, Lady Muriel rang 
the bell. "Ask the housekeeper to step here,” she said, 
"and to bring the children’s walking-things with her.” 

"I’ve brought them, my Lady,” said the obsequious 
housekeeper, entering after another minute of silence. 
“I thought the young lady would have come to my room 
to put on her boots. Here’s your boots, my love!” she 
added cheerfully, looking in all directions for the children. 
There was no answer, and she turned to Lady Muriel 
with a puzzled smile. "Have the little darlings hid them¬ 
selves?” 

“I don’t see them, just now,” Lady Muriel replied, 
rather evasively. “You can leave their things here, Wil¬ 
son. I’ll dress them, when they’re ready to go.” 

The two little hats, and Sylvie’s walking-jacket, were 
handed round among the ladies, with many exclamations 
of delight. There certainly was a sort of witchery of 
beauty about them. Even the little boots did not miss 
their share of favourable criticism. "Such natty little 
things!” the musical young lady exclaimed, almost 
fondling them as she spoke. "And what tiny tiny feet they 
must have!” 

Finally, the things were piled together on the centre- 
ottoman, and the guests, despairing of seeing the children 
again, began to wish good-night and leave the house. 

There were only some eight or nine left—to whom the 
Count was explaining, for the twentieth time, how he had 
had his eye on the children during the last verse of the 
song; how he had then glanced round the room, to see 
what effect "de great chest-note” had had upon his audi¬ 
ence; and how, when he looked back again, they had both 
disappeared—when exclamations of dismay began to be 



BEYOND THESE VOICES 599 

heard on all sides, the Count hastily bringing his story to 
an end to join in the outcry. 

The walking-things had all disappeared! 

After the utter failure of the search for the children, 
there was a very half-hearted search made for their 
apparel. The remaining guests seemed only too glad to 
get away, leaving only the Count and our four selves. 

The Count sank into an easy-chair, and panted a little. 

"Who then are these dear children, I pray you?” he 
said. "Why come they, why go they, in this so little 
ordinary a fashion? That the music should make itself 
vanish—that the hats, the boots, should make themselves 
to vanish—how is it, I pray you?” 

"I’ve no idea where they are!” was all I could say, on 
finding myself appealed to, by general consent, for an 
explanation. 

The Count seemed about to ask further questions, but 
checked himself. 

"The hour makes himself to become late,” he said. "I 
wish to you a very good night, my Lady. I betake myself 
to my bed—to dream—if that indeed I be not dreaming 
now!” And he hastily left the room. 

“Stay awhile, stay awhile!” said the Earl, as I was 
about to follow the Count. “You are not a guest, you 
know! Arthur’s friend is at home here!” 

"Thanks!” I said, as with true English instincts, we 
drew our chairs together round the fire-place, though no 
fire was burning—Lady Muriel having taken the heap of 
music on her knee, to have one more search for the 
strangely-vanished song. 

"Don’t you sometimes feel a wild longing”, she said, 
addressing herself to me, "to have something more to do 
with your hands, while you talk, than just holding a 
cigar, and now and then knocking off the ash? Oh, I 
know all that you’re going to say!” (This was to Arthur, 
who appeared about to interrupt her.) "The Majesty of 
Thought supersedes the work of the fingers. A Man’s 
severe thinking, plus the shaking-off a cigar-ash, comes to 



600 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

the same total as a Woman’s trivial fancies, plus the 
most elaborate embroidery. That’s your sentiment, isn’t 
it, only better expressed?” 

Arthur looked into the radiant, mischievous face, with 
a grave and very tender smile. “Yes,” he said resignedly: 
“that is my sentiment, exactly.” 

“Rest of body, and activity of mind,” I put in. “Some 
writer tells us that is the acme of human happiness.” 

“Plenty of bodily rest, at any rate!” Lady Muriel re¬ 
plied, glancing at the three recumbent figures around 
her. “But what you call activity of mind -” 

“—is the privilege of young Physicians only,” said the 
Earl. “We old men have no claim to be active. What can 
an old man do but die?” 

“A good many other things, I should hope,” Arthur 
said earnestly. 

“Well, maybe. Still you have the advantage of me in 
many ways, dear boy! Not only that your day is dawning 
while mine is setting, but your interest in Life—somehow 
I ca’n’t help envying you that. It will be many a year be¬ 
fore you lose your hold of that.” 

“Yet surely many human interests survive human 
Life?” I said. 

“Many do, no doubt. And some forms of Science; but 
only some, I think. Mathematics, for instance: that seems 
to possess an endless interest: one ca’n’t imagine any 
form of Life, or any race of intelligent beings, where 
Mathematical truth would lose its meaning. But I fear 
Medicine stands on a different footing. Suppose you dis¬ 
cover a remedy for some disease hitherto supposed to be 
incurable. Well, it is delightful for the moment, no doubt 
—full of interest—perhaps it brings you fame and fortune. 
But what then? Look on, a few years, into a life where dis¬ 
ease has no existence. What is your discovery worth, then ? 
Milton makes Jove promise too much. ’Of so much fame in 
heaven expect thy meed.’ Poor comfort when one’s ‘fame’ 
concerns matters that will have ceased to have a meaning!' ’ 

"At any rate one wouldn’t care to make any fresh 



BEYOND THESE VOICES 


601 

medical discoveries,” said Arthur. “I see no help for that 
—though I shall be sorry to give up my favourite studies. 
Still, medicine, disease, pain, sorrow, sin—I fear they’re 
all linked together. Banish sin, and you banish them all!” 

“Military science is a yet stronger instance,” said the 
Earl. “Without sin, war would surely be impossible. Still 
any mind, that has had in this life any keen interest, not 
in itself sinful, will surely find itself some congenial line 
of work hereafter. Wellington may have no more battles 
to fight—and yet— 

‘ We doubt not that, for one so true, 

There must be other, nobler work to do. 

Than when he fought at Waterloo, 

And Victor he must ever be!’ ” 

He lingered over the beautiful words, as if he loved 
them: and his voice, like distant music, died away into 
silence. 

After a minute or two he began again. "If I’m not 
wearying you, I would like to tell you an idea of the 
future Life which has haunted me for years, like a sort of 
waking nightmare—I ca’n’t reason myself out of it.” 

“Pray do,” Arthur and I replied, almost in a breath. 
Lady Muriel put aside the heap of music, and folded her 
hands together. 

“The one idea”, the Earl resumed, "that has seemed to 
me to overshadow all the rest, is that of Eternity —in¬ 
volving, as it seems to do, the necessary exhaustion of all 
subjects of human interest. Take Pure Mathematics, for 
instance—a Science independent of our present sur¬ 
roundings. I have studied it, myself, a little. Take the 
subject of circles and ellipses—what we call ‘curves of the 
second degree’. In a future Life, it would only be a ques¬ 
tion of so many years (or hundreds of years, if you like), 
for a man to work out all their properties. Then he might 
go to curves of the third degree. Say that took ten times as 
long (you see we have unlimited time to deal with). I can 
hardly imagine his interest in the subject holding out 



602 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

even for those; and, though there is no limit to the degree 
of the curves he might study, yet surely the time, needed 
to exhaust all the novelty and interest of the subject, 
would be absolutely finite ? And so of all other branches of 
Science. And, when I transport myself, in thought, 
through some thousands or millions of years, and fancy 
myself possessed of as much Science as one created reason 
can carry, I ask myself ‘What then? With nothing more 
to learn, can one rest content on knowledge, for the eter¬ 
nity yet to be lived through?’ It has been a very wearying 
thought to me. I have sometimes fancied one might, in 
that event, say ‘It is better not to be’, and pray for per¬ 
sonal annihilation —the Nirvana of the Buddhists.” 

‘‘But that is only half the picture,” I said. ‘‘Besides 
working for oneself, may there not be the helping of 
others ?” 

“Surely, surely!” Lady Muriel exclaimed in a tone of 
relief, looking at her father with sparkling eyes. 

“Yes,” said the Earl, “so long as there were any others 
needing help. But, given ages and ages more, surely all 
created reasons would at length reach the same dead level 
of satiety. And then what is there to look forward to?” 

“I know that weary feeling,” said the young Doctor. 
“I have gone through it all, more than once. Now let me 
tell you how I have put it to myself. I have imagined a 
little child, playing with toys on his nursery-floor, and 
yet able to reason, and to look on, thirty years ahead. 
Might he not say to himself ‘By that time I shall have had 
enough of bricks and ninepins. How weary Life will be!’ 
Yet, if we look forward through those thirty years, we 
find him a great statesman, full of interests and joys far 
more intense than his baby-life could give—joys wholly 
inconceivable to his baby-mind—joys such as no baby- 
language could in the faintest degree describe. Now, may 
not our life, a million years hence, have the same rela¬ 
tion, to our life now, that the man’s life has to the child’s? 
And, just as one might try, all in vain, to express to that 
child, in the language of bricks and ninepins, the meaning 



TO THE RESCUE! 


603 

of ‘politics’, so perhaps all those descriptions of Heaven, 
with its music, and its feasts, and its streets of gold, may¬ 
be only attempts to describe, in our words, things for 
which we really have no words at all. Don’t you think that, 
in your picture of another life, you are in fact trans¬ 
planting that child into political life, without making any 
allowance for his growing up?” 

‘I think I understand you,” said the Earl. ‘‘The music 
of Heaven may be something beyond our powers of 
thought. Yet the music of Earth is sweet! Muriel, my 
child, sing us something before we go to bed!” 

‘‘Do,” said Arthur, as he rose and lit the candles on the 
cottage-piano, lately banished from the drawing-room to 
make room for a ‘‘semi-grand”. ‘‘There is a song here, 
that I have never heard you sing. 

‘Hail to thee, blithe spirit! 

Bird thou never wert, 

That from Heaven, or near it, 

Pourest thy full heart!’ ” 

he read from the page he had spread open before her. 

‘‘And our little life here”, the Earl went on, ‘‘is, to that 
grand time, like a child’s summer-day! One gets tired as 
night draws on,” he added, with a touch of sadness in his 
voice, “and one gets to long for bed! For those welcome 
words ‘Come, child, 'tis bed-time!’ ” 


Chapter XVII 
To the Rescue! 

“It isn’t bed-time!” said a sleepy little voice. "The owls 
hasn’t gone to bed, and I s’a’n’t go to seep wizout 00 
sings to me!” 

“Oh, Bruno!” cried Sylvie. “Don’t you know the owls 



604 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

have only just got up? But the frogs have gone to bed, 
ages ago.’ 

"Well, I aren’t a frog,” said Bruno. 

“What shall I sing?” said Sylvie, skilfully avoiding the 
argument. 

"Ask Mister Sir,” Bruno lazily replied, clasping his 
hands behind his curly head, and lying back on his fern- 
leaf, till it almost bent over with his weight. "This aren’t 
a comfable leaf, Sylvie. Find me a comfabler—please!’’ he 
added, as an after-thought, in obedience to a warning 
finger held up by Sylvie. "I doosn’t like being feet-up- 
wards!” 

It was .a pretty sight to see—the motherly way in 
which the fairy-child gathered up her little brother in her 
arms, and laid him on a stronger leaf. She gave it just a 
touch to set it rocking, and it went on vigorously by it¬ 
self, as if it contained some hidden machinery. It cer¬ 
tainly wasn’t the wind, for the evening-breeze had quite 
died away again, and not a leaf was stirring over our 
heads. 

"Why does that one leaf rock so, without the others?” 
I asked Sylvie. She only smiled sweetly and shook her 
head. "I don’t know why,” she said. "It always does, if 
it’s got a fairy-child on it. It has to, you know.” 

"And can people see the leaf rock, who ca’n’t see the 
Fairy on it?” 

"Why, of course!” cried Sylvie. "A leaf’s a leaf, and 
everybody can see it; but Bruno’s Bruno, and they ca’n’t 
see him, unless they’re eerie, like you.” 

Then I understood how it was that one sometimes sees 
—going through the woods in a still evening—one fern- 
leaf rocking steadily on, all by itself. Haven’t you ever 
seen that? Try if you can see the fairy-sleeper on it, next 
time; but don’t pick the leaf, whatever you do; let the 
little one sleep on! 

But all this time Bruno was getting sleepier and sleep¬ 
ier. "Sing, sing!” he murmured fretfully, Sylvie looked to 
me for instructions. “What shall it be?” she said. 



TO the rescue! 


605 

“Could you sing him the nursery-song you once told me 
of?” I suggested. “The one that had been put through 
the mind-mangle, you know. 'The little man that had a 
little gun,’ I think it was.” 

“Why, that are one of the Professor’s songs!” cried 
Bruno. “I likes the little man; and I likes the way they 
spinned him—like a teetle-totle-tum.” And he turned a 
loving look on the gentle old man who was sitting at the 
other side of his leaf-bed, and who instantly began to sing, 
accompanying himself on his Outlandish guitar, while 
the snail, on which he sat, waved its horns in time to the 
music. 


In stature the Manlet was dwarfish — 

No burly big Blunderbore he: 

And he wearily gazed on the crawfish 
His Wifelet had dressed for his tea. 
“Now reach me, sweet Atom, my gunlet. 
And hurl the old shoelet for luck: 

Let me hie to the bank of the runlet, 

And shoot thee a Duck!” 


She has reached him his minikin gunlet: 

She has hurled the old shoelet for luck: 
She is busily baking a bunlet, 

To welcome him home with his Duck. 

On he speeds, never wasting a wordlet. 
Though thoughilets’cling; closely as wax. 
To the spot where the beautiful birdlet 
So quietly quacks. 


Where the Lobsterlet lurks, and the Crablet 
So slowly and sleepily crawls: 

Where the Dolphin’s at home, and the Dablet 
Pays long ceremonious calls: 

Where the Grublet is sought by the Froglet: 

Where the Frog is pursued by the Duck: 
Where the Ducklet is chased by the Doglet — 
So runs the world's luck! 



606 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

He has loaded with bullet and powder: 

His footfall is noiseless as air: 

But the Voices grow louder and louder, 

And bellow, and bluster, and blare. 

They bristle before him and after. 

They flutter above and below, 

Shrill shriekings of lubberly laughter, 

Weird wailings of woe! 

They echo without him, within him: 

They thrill through his whiskers and beard: 
Like a teetotum seeming to spin him. 

With sneers never hitherto sneered. 
“Avengement,” they cry, "on our Foelet! 

Let the Manikin weep for our wrongs! 

Let us drench him, from toplet to toelet, 

With Nursery-Songs! 


“He shall muse upon ‘Hey! Diddle! Diddle!’ 

On the Cow that surmounted the Moon: 

He shall rave of the Cat and the Fiddle, 

And the Dish that eloped with the Spoon: 
And his soul shall be sad for the Spider, 
When Miss Muffet was sipping her whey, 
That so tenderly sat down beside her, 

And scared her away! 


“ The music of Midsummer-madness 
Shall sting him with many a bite, 

Till, in rapture of rollicking sadness, 

He shall groan with a gloomy delight: 

He shall swathe him, like mists of the morning. 
In platitudes luscious and limp, 

Such as deck, with a deathless adorning, 

The Song of the Shrimp! 


“When the Ducklet's dark doom is decided, 
We will trundle him home in a trice: 
And the banquet, so plainly provided, 

Shall round into rose-buds and rice: 



TO THE RESCUE! 607 

In a blaze of pragmatic invention 

He shall wrestle with Fate, and shall reign: 

But he has not a friend fit to mention, 

So hit him again!" 

He has shot it, the delicate darling! 

And the Voices have ceased from their strife: 

Not a whisper of sneering or snarling, 

Ashe carries it home to his wife: 

Then, cheerily champing the bunlet 
His spouse was so skilful to bake, 

He hies him once more to the runlet. 

To fetch her the Drake! 

"He’s sound asleep now," said Sylvie, carefully tucking 
in the edge of a violet-leaf, which she had been spreading 
over him as a sort of blanket: “good night!” 

"Good night!” I echoed. 

"You may well say ‘good night’!” laughed Lady Muriel, 
rising and shutting up the piano as she spoke. "When 
you’ve been nid—nid—nodding all the time I’ve been 
singing for your benefit! What was it all about, now?” 
she demanded imperiously. 

“Something about a duck?” I hazarded. "Well, a bird 
of some kind?” I corrected myself, perceiving at once 
that that guess was wrong, at any rate. 

‘‘Something about a bird of some kind!” Lady Muriel 
repeated, with as much withering scorn as her sweet face 
was capable of conveying. "And that’s the way he speaks 
of Shelley’s Sky-Lark, is it? When the Poet particularly 
says ‘Hail to thee, blithe spirit! Bird thou never wert!’ ” 

She led the way to the smoking-room, where, ignoring 
all the usages of Society and all the instincts of Chivalry, 
the three Lords of the Creation reposed at their ease in 
low rocking-chairs, and permitted the one lady who was 
present to glide gracefully about among us, supplying our 
wants in the form of cooling drinks, cigarettes, and lights. 
Nay, it was only one of the three who had the chivalry to 
go beyond the common-place "thank you”, and.to quote 



608 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

the Poet’s exquisite description of how Geraint, when 
waited on by Enid, was moved 

“To stoop and kiss the tender little thumb 
That crossed the platter as she laid it down,” 

and to suit the action to the word—an audacious liberty 
for which, I feel bound to report, he was not duly repri¬ 
manded. 

As no topic of conversation seemed to occur to any one, 
and as we were, all four, on those delightful terms with 
one another (the only terms, I think, on which any 
friendship, that deserves the name of intimacy, can be 
maintained) which involve no sort of necessity for speak¬ 
ing for mere speaking’s sake, we sat in silence for some 
minutes. 

At length I broke the silence by asking "Is there any 
fresh news fr^m the harbour about the Fever?” 

"None si. is morning,” the Earl said, looking very 
grave. "But tnat was alarming enough. The Fever is 
spreading fast: the London doctor has taken fright and 
left the place, and the only one now available isn’t a regu¬ 
lar doctor at all: he is apothecary, and doctor, and den¬ 
tist, and I don’t know what other trades, all in one. It’s a 
bad outlook for those poor fishermen—and a worse one 
for all the women and children.” 

"How many are there of them altogether?” Arthur 
asked. 

"There were nearly one hundred, a week ago,” said 
the Earl: "but there have been twenty or thirty deaths 
since then.” 

"And what religious ministrations are there to be 
had?” 

"There are three brave men down there,” the Earl 
replied, his voice trembling with emotion, "gallant heroes 
as ever won the Victoria Cross! I am certain that no one of 
the three will ever leave the place merely to save his own 
life. There’s the Curate: his wife is with him: they have 
no children. Then there’s the Roman Catholic Priest. And 



TO THE RESCUE! 


609 

there’s the Wesleyan Minister. They go amongst their 
own flocks mostly; but I’m told that those who are dying 
like to have any of the three with them. How slight the 
barriers seem to be that part Christian from Christian, 
when one has to deal with the great facts of Life and the 
reality of Death!” 

"So it must be, and so it should be-” Arthur was 

beginning, when the front-door bell rang, suddenly and 
violently. 

We heard the front-door hastily opened, and voices 
outside: then a knock at the door of the smoking-room, 
and the old house-keeper appeared, looking a little scared. 

“Two persons, my Lord, to speak with Dr. Forester.” 

Arthur stepped outside at once, and we heard his cheery 
"Well, my men?” but the answer was less audible, the 
only words I could distinctly catch being "ten since morn¬ 
ing, and two more just-” 

"But there is a doctor there?” we heard Arthur say: 
and a deep voice, that we had not heard before, replied 
“Dead, Sir. Died three hours ago.” 

Lady Muriel shuddered, and hid her face in her hands: 
but at this moment the front-door was quietly closed, and 
we heard no more. 

For a few minutes we sat quite silent: then the Earl left 
the room, and soon returned to tell us that Arthur had 
gone away with the two fishermen, leaving word that he 
would be back in about an hour. And, true enough, at the 
end of that interval—during which very little was said, 
none of us seeming to have the heart to talk—the front¬ 
door once more creaked on its rusty hinges, and a step 
was heard in the passage, hardly to be recognized as 
Arthur’s, so slow and uncertain was it, like a blind man 
feeling his way. 

He came in, and stood before Lady Muriel, resting one 
hand heavily on the table, and with a strange look in his 
eyes, as if he were walking in his sleep. 

“Muriel—my love-” he paused, and his lips quiv¬ 

ered: but after a minute he went on more steadily. 



6lO SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

"Muriel—my darling—they —want me—down in the har¬ 
bour.” 

“Must you go?” she pleaded, rising and laying her 
hands on his shoulders, and looking up into his face with 
her great eyes brimming over with tears. "Must you go, 
Arthur? It may mean—death!” 

He met her gaze without flinching. "It does mean 
death,” he said, in a husky whisper: "but—darling—I am 

called. And even my life itself-” His voice failed him, 

and he said no more. 

For a minute she stood quite silent, looking upwards 
with a helpless gaze, as if even prayer were now useless, 
while her features worked and quivered with the great 
agony she was enduring. Then a sudden inspiration 
seemed to come upon her and light up her face with a 
strange sweet smile. “Your life?” she repeated. "It is not 
yours to give!” 

Arthur had recovered himself by this time, and could 
reply quite firmly, “That is true,” he said. "It is not mine 
to give. It is yours, now, my—wife that is to be! And you 
—do you forbid me to go? Will you not spare me, my 
own beloved one?” 

Still clinging to him, she laid her head softly on his 
breast. She had never done such a thing in my presence 
before, and I knew how deeply she must be moved. “I 
will spare you”, she said, calmly and quietly, "to God.” 

"And to God’s poor,” he whispered. 

"And to God’s poor,” she added. “When must it be, 
sweet love?” 

"To-morrow morning,” he replied. "And I have much 
to do before then.” 

And then he told us how he had spent his hour of ab¬ 
sence. He had been to the Vicarage, and had arranged for 
the wedding to take place at eight the next morning 
(there was no legal obstacle, as he had, some time before 
this, obtained a Special Licence) in the little church we 
knew so well. “My old friend here”, indicating me, "will 
act as ‘Best Man’, I know: your father will be there to 



TO THE RESCUE! 6ll 

give you away: and—and—you will dispense with bride's- 
maids, my darling?” 

She nodded: no words came. 

"And then I can go with a willing heart—to do God’s 
work—knowing that we are one —and that we are to¬ 
gether in spirit, though not in bodily presence—and are 
most of all together when we pray! Our prayers will go 
up together-” 

"Yes, yes!” sobbed Lady Muriel. "But you must not 
stay longer now, my darling! Go home and take some 
rest. You will need all your strength to-morrow-” 

"Well, I will go,” said Arthur. "We will be here in 
good time to-morrow. Good night, my own own dar¬ 
ling!” 

I followed his example, and we two left the house to¬ 
gether. As we walked back to our lodgings, Arthur 
sighed deeply once or twice, and seemed about to speak— 
but no words came, till we had entered the house, and 
had lit our candles, and were at our bedroom-doors. Then 
Arthur said "Good night, old fellow! God bless you!” 

"God bless you!” I echoed from the very depths of my 
heart. 

We were back again at the Hall by eight in the morn¬ 
ing, and found Lady Muriel and the Earl, and the old 
Vicar, waiting for us. It was a strangely sad and silent 
party that walked up to the little church and back; and I 
could not help feeling that it was much more like a 
funeral than a wedding: to Lady Muriel it was in fact, a 
funeral rather than a wedding, so heavily did the presenti¬ 
ment weigh upon her (as she told us afterwards) that her 
newly-won husband was going forth to his death. 

Then we had breakfast; and, all too soon, the vehicle 
was at the door, which was to convey Arthur, first to his 
lodgings, to pick up the things he was taking with him, 
and then as far towards the death-stricken hamlet as it 
was considered safe to go. One or two of the fishermen 
were to meet him on the road, to carry his things the rest 
of the way. 



612 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

"And are you quite sure you are taking all that you 
will need?" Lady Muriel asked. 

"All that I shall need as a doctor, certainly. And my 
own personal needs are few: I shall not even take any of 
my own wardrobe—there is a fisherman's suit, ready¬ 
made, that is waiting for me at my lodgings. I shall only 
take my watch, and a few books, and—stay—there is one 
book I should like to add, a pocket-Testament—to use at 
the bedsides of the sick and dying-” 

"Take mine!” said Lady Muriel: and she ran upstairs 
to fetch it. "It has nothing written in it but ‘Muriel’,” she 
said as she returned with it: “shall I inscribe-” 

"No, my own one,” said Arthur, taking it from her. 
"What could you inscribe better than that? Could any 
human name mark it more clearly as my own individual 
property? Are you not mine? Are you not,” (with all 
the old playfulness of manner) "as Bruno would say, ‘my 
very mine’?” 

He bade a long and loving adieu to the Earl and to me, 
and left the room, accompanied only by his wife, who 
was bearing up bravely, and was— outwardly, at least— 
less overcome than her old father. We waited in the room 
a minute or two, till the sounds of wheels had told us that 
Arthur had driven away; and even then we waited still, 
for the step of Lady Muriel, going upstairs to her room, to 
die away in the distance. Her step, usually so light and 
joyous, now sounded slow and weary, like one who plods 
on under a load of hopeless misery; and I felt almost as 
hopeless, and almost as wretched as she. "Are we four 
destined ever to meet again, on this side the grave?” I 
asked myself, as I walked to my home. And the tolling of 
a distant bell seemed to answer me, "No! No! No!” 



Chapter XVIII 
A Newspaper-Cutting 

EXTRACT FROM THE “FAYFIELD CHRONICLE”. 

Our readers will have followed with painful interest, the ac¬ 
counts we have from time to time published of the terrible 
epidemic which has, during the last two months, carried off 
most of the inhabitants of the little fishing-harbour adjoining 
the village of Elveston. The last survivors, numbering twenty- 
three only, out of a population which, three short months ago, 
exceeded one hundred and twenty, were removed on Wednesday 
last, under the authority of the Local Board, and safely lodged 
in the County Hospital: and the place is now veritably “a city 
of the dead”, without a single human voice to break its silence. 

The rescuing party consisted of six sturdy fellows—fishermen 
from the neighbourhood—directed by the resident Physician of 
the Hospital, who came over for that purpose, heading a train of 
hospital-ambulances. The six men had been selected—from a 
much larger number who had volunteered for this peaceful “for¬ 
lorn hope”—for their strength and robust health, as the expedi¬ 
tion was considered to be, even now, when the malady has ex¬ 
pended its chief force, not unattended with danger. 

Every precaution that science could suggest, against the risk 
of infection, was adopted: and the sufferers were tenderly 
carried on litters, one by one, up the steep hill, and placed in the 
ambulances which, each provided with a hospital nurse, were 
waiting on the level road. The fifteen miles, to the Hospital, were 
done at a walking-pace, as some of the patients were in too pro¬ 
strate a condition to bear jolting, and the journey occupied the 
whole afternoon. 

The twenty-three patients consist of nine men, six women, 
and eight children. It has not been found possible to identify 
them all, as some of the children—left with no surviving rela¬ 
tives—are infants: and two men and one woman are not yet able 
to make rational replies, the brain-powers being entirely in 
abeyance. Among a more well-to-do race, there would no doubt 
have been names marked on the clothes; but here no such evi¬ 
dence is forthcoming. 

Besides the poor fishermen and their families, there were but 
five persons to be accounted for: and it was ascertained, beyond 

613 



614 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

a doubt, that all five are numbered with the dead. It is a melan¬ 
choly pleasure to place on record the names of these genuine 
martyrs—than whom none, surely, are more worthy to be entered 
on the glory-roll of England’s heroes! They are as follows: 

The Rev. James Burgess, M.A., and Emma his wife. He was 
the Curate at the Harbour, not thirty years old, and had been 
married only two years. A written record was found in their 
house, of the dates of their deaths. 

Next to theirs we will place the honoured named of Dr. 
Arthur Forester, who, on the death of the local physician, nobly 
faced the imminent peril of death, rather than leave these poor 
folk uncared for in their last extremity. No record of his name, 
or of the date of his death, was found: but the corpse was easily 
identified, although dressed in the ordinary fisherman’s suit 
(which he was known to have adopted when he went down there), 
by a copy of the New Testament, the gift of his wife, which was 
found, placed next his heart, with his hands crossed over it. It 
was not thought prudent to remove the body, for burial elsewhere: 
and accordingly it was at once committed to the ground, along 
with four others found in different houses, with all due reverence. 
His wife, whose maiden name was Lady Muriel Orme, had been 
married to him on the very morning on which he undertook his 
self-sacrificing mission. 

Next we record the Rev. Walter Saunders, Wesleyan Min¬ 
ister. His death is believed to have taken place two or three 
weeks ago, as the words “Died October 5” were found written 
on the wall of the room which he is known to have occupied—the 
house being shut up, and apparently not having been entered for 
some time. 

Last—though not a whit behind the other four in glorious self- 
denial and devotion to duty—let us record the name of Father 
Francis, a young Jesuit Priest who had been only a few months 
in the place. He had not been dead many hours when the explor¬ 
ing party came upon the body, which was identified, beyond the 
possibility of doubt, by the dress, and by the crucifix which was, 
like the young Doctor’s Testament, clasped closely to his heart. 

Since reaching the hospital, two of the men and one of the 
children have died. Hope is entertained for all the others: though 
there are two or three cases where the vital powers seem to be so 
entirely exhausted that it is but “hoping against hope” to regard 
ultimate recovery as even possible. 



Chapter XIX 
A Fairy-Duet 

The year—what an eventful year it had been for me!— 
was drawing to a close, and the brief wintry day hardly 
gave light enough to recognize the old familiar objects, 
bound up with so many happy memories, as the train 
glided round the last bend into the station, and the hoarse 
cry of “Elveston! Elveston!" resounded along the plat¬ 
form. 

It was sad to return to the place, and to feel that I 
should never again see the glad smile of welcome, that 
had awaited me here so few months ago. "And yet, if I 
were to find him here," I muttered, as in solitary state I 
followed the porter, who was wheeling my luggage on a 
barrow, "and if he were to ‘strike a sudden hand in mine, 
And ask a thousand things of home’ I should not—no, 'I 
should not feel it to be strange ’!” 

Having given directions to have my luggage taken to 
my old lodgings, I strolled off alone, to pay a visit, before 
settling down in my own quarters, to my dear old friends 
—for such I indeed felt them to be, though it was barely 
half a year since first we met—the Earl and his widowed 
daughter. 

The shortest way, as I well remembered, was to cross 
through the churchyard. I pushed open the little wicket- 
gate and slowly took my way among the solemn mem¬ 
orials of the quiet dead, thinking of the many who had, 
during the past year, disappeared from the place, and had 
gone to "join the majority”. A very few steps brought me 
in sight of the object of my search. Lady Muriel, dressed 
in the deepest mourning, her face hidden by a long crape 
veil, was kneeling before a little marble cross, round 
which she was fastening a wreath of flowers. 

The cross stood on a piece of level turf, unbroken by 
any mound, and I knew that it was simply a memorial- 

615 



6l6 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

cross, for one whose dust reposed elsewhere, even before 
reading the simple inscription: 

.In loving Memony of 
ARTHUR FORESTER, M.D. 
whose mortal remains lie buried by the sea: 
whose spirit has returned to God who gave it. 

“greater love hath no man than this, that 

A MAN LAY DOWN HIS LIFE FOR HIS FRIENDS.” 

She threw back her veil on seeing me approach, and 
came forwards to meet me, with a quiet smile, and far 
more self-possessed than I could have expected. 

“It is quite like old times, seeing you here again!” she 
said, in tones of genuine pleasure. “Have you been to see 
my father?” 

“No,” I said: “I was on my way there, and came 
through here as the shortest way. I hope he is well, and 
you also?” 

“Thanks, we are both quite well. And you? Are you 
any better yet?” 

“Not much better, I fear: but no worse, I am thankful 
to say.” 

“Let us sit here awhile, and have a quiet chat,” she 
said. The calmness—almost indifference—of her manner 
quite took me by surprise. I little guessed what a fierce 
restraint she was putting uppn herself. 

“One can be so quiet here,” she resumed. “I come here 
every—every day.” 

“It is very peaceful,” I said. 

“You got my letter?” 

“Yes, but I delayed writing. It is so hard to say—on 
paper -” 

“I know. It was kind of you. You were with us when 

we saw the last of-” She paused a moment, and went 

on more hurriedly. “I went down to the harbour several 
times, but no one knows which of those vast graves it is. 
However, they showed me the house he died in: that was 



A FAIRY-DUET 


617 

somecomfort. I stood in the very room where—where-” 

She struggled in vain to go on. The flood-gates had given 
way at last, and the outburst of grief was the most ter¬ 
rible I had ever witnessed. Totally regardless of my pres¬ 
ence, she flung herself down on the turf, burying her face 
in the grass, and with her hands clasped round the little 
marble cross. “Oh, my darling, my darling!" she sobbed. 
“And God meant your life to be so beautiful!” 

I was startled to hear, thus repeated by Lady Muriel, 
the very words of the darling child whom I had seen 
weeping so bitterly over the dead hare. Had some myster¬ 
ious influence passed, from that sweet fairy-spirit, ere she 
went back to Fairyland, into the human spirit that loved 
her so dearly? The idea seemed too wild for belief. And 
yet, are there not “ more things in heaven and earth than are 
dreamt of in our philosophy " ? 

“God meant it to be beautiful,” I whispered, “and sure¬ 
ly it was beautiful? God’s purpose never fails!” I dared 
say no more, but rose and left her. At the entrance-gate 
to the Earl’s house I waited, leaning on the gate and 
watching the sun set, revolving many memories—some 
happy, some sorrowful—until Lady Muriel joined me. 

She was quite calm again now. “Do come in,” she said. 
“My father will be so pleased to see you!” 

The old man rose from his chair, with a smile, to wel¬ 
come me; but his self-command was far less than his 
daughter’s, and the tears coursed down his face as he 
grasped both my hands in his, and pressed them warmly. 

My heart was too full to speak; and we all sat silent for 
a minute or two. Then Lady Muriel rang the bell for tea. 
“You do take five o’clock tea, I know!” she said to me, 
with the sweet playfulness of manner I remembered so 
well, "even though you ca'n't work your wicked will on 
the Law of Gravity, and make the teacups descend into 
Infinite Space, a little faster than the tea!” 

This remark gave the tone to our conversation. By a 
tacit mutual consent, we avoided, during this our first 
meeting after her great sorrow, the painful topics that 



6l8 SYLVIE AND‘BRUNO CONCLUDED 

filled our thoughts, and talked like light-hearted children 
who had never known a care. 

“Did you ever ask yourself the question,” Lady Muriel 
began, a propos of nothing, “what is the chief advantage 
of being a Man instead of a Dog?” 

“No, indeed,” I said: “but I think there are advantages 
on the Dog’s side of the question as well. 

“No doubt,” she replied, with that pretty mock-gravity 
that became her so well: “but, on Man’s side, the chief 
advantage seems to me to consist in having focketsl It 
was borne in upon me—upon us, I should say; for my 
father and I were returning from a walk—only yesterday. 
We met a dog carrying home a bone. What it wanted it 
for, I’ve no idea: certainly there was no meat on it-” 

A strange sensation came over me, that I had heard all 
this, or something exactly like it, before: and I almost 
expected her next words to be "perhaps he meant to 
make a cloak for the winter?” However what she really 
said was “and my father tried to account for it by some 
wretched joke about pro bono publico. Well, the dog laid 
down the bone— not in disgust with the pun, which 
would have shown it to be a dog of taste—but simply to 
rest its jaws, poor thing! I did pity it so! Won’t you join 
my Charitable Association for supplying dogs with pockets? 
How would you like to have to carry your walking-stick 
in your mouth?” 

Ignoring the difficult question as to the raison d’etre 
of a walking-stick, supposing one had no hands, I men¬ 
tioned a curious instance, I had once witnessed, of reason¬ 
ing by a dog. A gentleman, with a lady, and child, and 
a large dog, were down at the end of a pier on which I 
was walking. To amuse his child, I suppose, the gentle¬ 
man put down on the ground his umbrella and the lady’s 
parasol, and then led the way to the other end of the pier, 
from which he sent the dog back for the deserted articles. 
I was watching with some curiosity. The dog came racing 
back to where I stood, but found an unexpected difficulty 
in picking up the things it had come for. With the um- 



A FAIRY-DUET 


619 

brella in its mouth, its jaws were so far apart that it could 
get no firm grip on the parasol. After two or three failures, 
it paused and considered the matter. 

Then it put down the umbrella and began with the 
parasol. Of course that didn’t open its jaws nearly so wide, 
and it was able to get a good hold of the umbrella, and 
galloped off in triumph. One couldn’t doubt that it had 
gone through a real train of logical thought. 

“I entirely agree with you,” said Lady Muriel: ‘‘but 
don’t orthodox writers condemn that view, as putting 
Man on the level of the lower animals? Don’t they draw 
a sharp boundary-line between Reason and Instinct?” 

"That certainly was the orthodox view, a generation 
ago,” said the Earl. "The truth of Religion seemed ready 
to stand or fall with the assertion that Man was the only 
reasoning animal. But that is at an end now. Man can 
still claim certain monopolies—for instance, such a use 
of language as enables us to utilize the work of many, by 
‘division of labour’. But the belief, that we have a mono¬ 
poly of Reason, has long been swept away. Yet no catas¬ 
trophe has followed. As some old poet says, ‘God is where 
he was’.” 

"Most religious believers would now agree with Bishop 
Butler,” said I, "and not reject a line of argument, even 
if it led straight to the conclusion that animals have some 
kind of soul, which survives their bodily death.” 

"I would like to know that to be true!” Lady Muriel 
exclaimed. "If only for the sake of the poor horses. Some¬ 
times I’ve thought that, if anything could make me cease 
to believe in a God of perfect justice, it would be the suf¬ 
ferings of horses—without guilt to deserve it, and without 
any compensation!” 

"It is only part of the great Riddle,” said the Earl, 
"why innocent beings ever suffer. It is a great strain on 
Faith—but not a breaking strain, I think.” 

"The sufferings of horses” , I said, "are chiefly caused 
by Mans cruelty. So that is merely one of the many in¬ 
stances of Sin causing suffering to others than the Sinner 



620 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

himself. But don’t you find a greater difficulty in suffer* 
ings inflicted by animals upon each other? For instance, a 
cat playing with a mouse. Assuming it to have no moral 
responsibility, isn’t that a greater mystery than a man 
over-driving a horse?” 

"I think it is,” said Lady Muriel, looking a mute appeal 
to her father. 

“What right have we to make that assumption?” said 
the Earl. “ Many of our religious difficulties are merely 
deductions from unwarranted assumptions. The wisest 
answer to most of them, is, I think, ‘ behold , we know not 
anything ’.” 

“You mentioned ‘division of labour’, just now,” I said. 
“Surely it is carried to a wonderful perfection in a hive of 
bees?” 

“So wonderful—so entirely super-human—” said the 
Earl, “and so entirely inconsistent with the intelligence 
they show in other ways—that I feel no doubt at ail that 
it is pure Instinct, and not, as some hold, a very high 
order of Reason. Look at the utter stupidity of a bee, 
trying to find its way out of an open window! It doesn’t 
try, in any reasonable sense of the word: it simply bangs 
itself about! We should call a puppy imbecile, that behaved 
so. And yet we are asked to believe that its intellectual 
level is above Sir Isaac Newton!” 

“Then you hold that Pure Instinct contains no Reason 
at all?” 

"On the contrary,” said the Earl, “I hold that the work 
of a bee-hive involves Reason of the highest order. But 
none of it is done by the Bee. God has reasoned it all out, 
and has put into the mind of the Bee the conclusions, only, 
of the reasoning process. ” 

"But how do their minds come to work together}” I 
asked. 

“What right have we to assume that they have minds?” 

“Special pleading, special pleading!” Lady Muriel cried, 
in a most unfilial tone of triumph. “Why, you yourself 
said, just now, ‘the mind of the Bee’!” 



A FAIRY-DUET 


621 


“But I did not say 'minds’ , my child/' the Earl gently 
replied. “It has occurred to me, as the most probable 
solution of the ‘Bee’-mystery, that a swarm of Bees have 
only one mind among them. We often see one mind anima¬ 
ting a most complex collection of limbs and organs, when 
joined together. How do we know that any material con¬ 
nection is necessary? May not mere neighbourhood be 
enough? If so, a swarm of bees is simply a single animal 
whose many limbs are not quite close together!” 

“It is a bewildering thought,” I said, “and needs a 
night’s rest to grasp it properly. Reason and Instinct both 
tell me I ought to go home. So, good-night!” 

“I’ll ‘set’ you part of the way,” said Lady Muriel. “I’ve 
had no walk to-day. It will do me good, and I have more 
to say to you. Shall we go through the wood? It will be 
pleasanter than over the common, even though it is get¬ 
ting a little dark.” 

We turned aside into the shade of interlacing boughs, 
which formed an architecture of almost perfect symmetry, 
grouped into lovely groined arches, or running out, far as 
the eye could follow, into endless aisles, and chancels, 
and naves, like some ghostly cathedral, fashioned out of 
the dream of a moon-struck poet. 

“Always, in this wood,” she began after a pause 
(silence seemed natural in this dim solitude), “I begin 
thinking of Fairies! May I ask you a question?” she 
added hesitatingly. “Do you believe in Fairies? ” 

The momentary impulse was so strong to tell her of 
my experiences in this very wood, that I had to make a 
real effort to keep back the words that rushed to my 
lips. “If you mean, by ‘believe’, ‘believe in their possible 
existence’, I say ‘Yes’. For their actual existence , of course, 
one would need evidence.” 

“You were saying, the other day”, she went on, “that 
you would accept anything, on good evidence, that was 
not d priori impossible. And I think you named Ghosts 
as an instance of a provable phenomenon. Would Fairies 
be another instance?” 



622 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“Yes, I think so.” And again it was hard to check the 
wish to say more: but I was not yet sure of a sympathetic 
listener. 

“And have you any theory as to what sort of place 
they would occupy in Creation? Do tell me what you 
think about them! Would they, for instance (supposing 
such beings to exist), would they have any moral re¬ 
sponsibility? I mean” (and the light bantering tone sud¬ 
denly changed to one of deep seriousness) “would they 
be capable of sin?” 

“They can reason—on a lower level, perhaps, than men 
and women—never rising, I think, above the faculties of 
a child; and they have a moral sense, most surely. Such 
a being, without free will, would be an absurdity. So I 
am driven to the conclusion that'they are capable of sin.” 

“You believe in them?” she cried delightedly, with a 
sudden motion as if about to clap her hands. “Now tell 
me, have you any reason for it ? ” 

And still I strove to keep back the revelation I felt 
sure was coming. “I believe that there is life everywhere 
—not material only, not merely what is palpable to our 
senses—but immaterial and invisible as well. We believe 
in our own immaterial essence-—call it ‘soul’, or ‘spirit’, 
or what you will. Why should not other similar essences 
exist around us, not linked on to a visible and material 
body? Did not God make this swarm of happy insects, 
to dance in this sunbeam for one hour of bliss, for no 
other object, that we can imagine, than to swell the sum 
of conscious happiness? And where shall we dare to draw 
the line, and say ‘He has made all these and no more’ ?” 

“Yes, yes”! she assented, watching me with sparkling 
eyes. “But these are only reasons for not denying. You 
have more reasons than this, have you not?” 

“Well, yes,” I said, feeling I might safely tell all now. 
“And I could not find a fitter time or place to say it. I 
have seen them—and in this very wood!” 

Lady Muriel asked no more questions. Silently she 
paced at my side, with head bowed down and hands 



A FAIRY-DUET 


623 

clasped tightly together. Only, as my tale went on, she 
drew a little short quick breath now and then, like a 
child panting with delight. And I told her what I had 
never yet breathed to any other listener, of my double 
life, and, more than that (for mine might have been but 
a noonday-dream), of the double life of those two dear 
children. 

And when I told her of Bruno’s wild gambols, she 
laughed merrily; and when I spoke of Sylvie’s sweetness 
and her utter unselfishness and trustful love, she drew a 
deep breath, like one who hears at last some precious 
tidings for which the heart has ached for a long while; 
and the happy tears chased one another down her cheeks. 

“I have often longed to meet an angel,” she whispered, 
so low that I could hardly catch the words. “I'm so glad 
I’ve seen Sylvie! My heart went out to the child the first 
moment that I saw her—Listen!” she broke off suddenly. 
“That’s Sylvie singing! I’m sure of it! Don’t you know 
her voice?” 

“I have heard Bruno sing, more than once,” I said: 
“but I never heard Sylvie.” 

“I have only heard her once,” said Lady Muriel. “It was 
that day when you brought us those mysterious flowers. 
The children had run out into the garden; and I saw 
Eric coming in that way, and went to the window to 
meet him: and Sylvie was singing, under the trees, a 
song I had never heard before. The words were some¬ 
thing like ‘I think it is Love, I feel it is Love’. Her voice 
sounded far away, like a dream, but it was beautiful 
beyond all words—as sweet as an infant’s first smile, or 
the first gleam of the white cliffs when one is coming 
home after weary years—a voice that seemed to fill one’s 
whole being with peace and heavenly thoughts—Listen!” 
she cried, breaking off again in her excitement. "That is 
her voice, and that’s the very song!” 

I could distinguish no words, but there was a dreamy 
sense of music in the air that seemed to grow ever louder 
and louder, as if coming nearer to us. We stood quite 



624 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

silent, and in another minute the two children appeared, 
coming straight towards us through an arched opening 
among the trees. Each had an arm round the other, and 
the setting sun shed a golden halo round their heads, 
like what one sees in pictures of saints. They were look¬ 
ing in our direction, but evidently did not see us, and I 
soon made out that Lady Muriel had for once passed 
into a condition familiar to me, that we were both of us 
“eerie”, and that, though we could see the children so 
plainly, we were quite invisible to them. 

The song ceased just as they came into sight: but, to 
my delight, Bruno instantly said “Let’s sing it all again, 
Sylvie! It did sound so pretty!” And Sylvie replied "Very 
well. It’sycw to begin, you know.” 

So Bruno began, in the sweet childish treble I knew 
so well: 

“Say, what is the spell, when her fledgelings are cheeping, 

That lures the bird home to her nest? 

Or wakes the tired mother, whose infant is weeping, 

To cuddle and croon it to rest? 

What’s the magic that charms the glad babe in her arms, 

Till it cooes with the voice of the dove?” 

And now ensued quite the strangest of all the strange 
experiences that marked the wonderful year whose history 
I am writing—the experience of first hearing Sylvie’s 
voice in song. Her part was a very short one—only a 
few words—and she sang it timidly, and very low indeed, 
scarcely audibly, but the sweetness of her voice was simply 
indescribable; I have never heard any earthly music like 
it. 


“ ’Tis a secret, and so let us whisper it low — 

And the name of the secret is Love!” 

On me the first effect of her voice was a sudden sharp 
pang that seemed to pierce through one’s very heart. (I 
had felt such a pang only once before in my life, and it 
had been from seeing what, at the moment, realized one’s 



A FAIRY-DUET 


625 

idea of perfect beauty—it was in a London exhibition, 
where, in making my way through a crowd, I suddenly 
met, face to face, a child of quite unearthly beauty.) Then 
came a rush of burning tears to the eyes, as though one 
could weep one’s soul away for pure delight. And lastly 
there fell on me a sense of awe that was almost terror— 
some such feeling as Moses must have had when he 
heard the words “Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for 
the place whereon thou standest is holy ground” . The 
figures of the children became vague and shadowy, like 
glimmering meteors: while their voices rang together in 
exquisite harmony as they sang: 

"For I think it is Love, 

For I feel it is Love, 

For I’m sure it is nothing hut Love!” 

By this time I could see them clearly once more. Bruno 
again sang by himself: 

“ Say, whence is the voice that, when anger is burning. 

Bids the whirl of the tempest to cease? 

That stirs the vexed soul with an aching—a yearning 
For the brotherly hand-grip of peace? 

Whence the music that fills all our being—that thrills 
Around us, beneath, and above?” 

Sylvie sang more courageously, this time: the words 
seemed to carry her away, out of herself: 

“ ’Tis a secret: none knows how it comes, how it goes: 

But the name of the secret is Love!” 

And clear and strong the chorus rang out: 

“For I think it is Love, 

For I feel it is Love, 

For I’m sure it is nothing but Love!” 

Once more we heard Bruno’s delicate little voice alone: 


x 


L.C. 



626 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 


“Say whose is the skill that paints valley and hill, 

Like a picture so fair to the sight? 

That flecks the green meadow with sunshine and shadow, 
Till the little lambs leap with delight?’’ 

And again uprose that silvery voice, whose angelic 
sweetness I could hardly bear: 

“ ’Tis a secret untold to hearts cruel and cold, 

Though ’tis sung, by the angels above. 

In notes that ring clear for the ears that can hear — 

And the name of the secret is Love!” 

And then Bruno joined in again with 

“For I think it is Love, 

For I feel it is Love, 

For I’m sure it is nothing but Love!" 

“That are pretty!” the little fellow exclaimed, as the 
children passed us—so closely that we drew back a little 
to make room for them, and it seemed we had only to 
reach out a hand to touch them: but this we did not 
attempt. 

“No use to try and stop them!” I said, as they passed 
away into the shadows. “Why, they could not even 
see us!” 

“No use at all,” Lady Muriel echoed with a sigh. “One 
would like to meet them again, in living form! But I feel, 
somehow, that can never be. They have passed out of 
our lives!” She sighed again; and no more was said, till 
we came out into the main road, at a point near my 
lodgings. 

“Well, I will leave you here,” she said. “I want to get 
back before dark: and I have a cottage-friend to visit, 
first. Good night, dear friend! Let us see you soon—and 
often!” she added, with an affectionate warmth that went 
to my very heart. “For those are few we hold as dear!" 

“Good night!” I answered. “Tennyson said that of a 
worthier friend than me.” 



GAMMON AND SPINACH 627 

“Tennyson didn’t know what he was talking about!” 
she saucily rejoined, with a touch of her old childish 
gaiety, and we parted. 


Chapter XX 
Gammon and Spinach 

My landlady’s welcome had an extra heartiness about it: 
and though, with a rare delicacy of feeling, she made no 
direct allusion to the friend whose companionship had 
done so much to brighten life for me, I felt sure that it 
was a kindly sympathy with my solitary state that made 
her so specially anxious to do all she could think of to 
ensure my comfort, and make me feel at home. 

The lonely evening seemed long and tedious: yet I 
lingered on, watching the dying fire, and letting Fancy 
mould the red embers into the forms and faces belonging 
to bygone scenes. Now it seemed to be Bruno’s roguish 
smile that sparkled for a moment, and died away: now 
it was Sylvie’s rosy cheek: and now the Professor’s jolly 
round face, beaming with delight. “You’re welcome, my 
little ones!” he seemed to say. And then the red coal, 
which for the moment embodied the dear old Professor, 
began to wax dim, and with its dying lustre the words 
seemed to die away into silence. I seized the poker, and 
with an artful touch or two revived the waning glow, 
while Fancy—no coy minstrel she—sang me once again 
the magic strain I loved to hear. 

“You’re welcome, little ones!” the cheery voice re¬ 
peated. “I told them you were coming. Your rooms are 
all ready for you. And the Emperor and the Empress— 
well, I think they’re rather pleased than otherwise! In 
fact. Her Highness said ‘I hope they’ll be in time for the 
Banquet!' Those were her very words, I assure you!” 



628 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“Will Uggug be at the Banquet?” Bruno asked. And 
both children looked uneasy at the dismal suggestion. 

“Why, of course he will!” chuckled the Professor. 
“Why, it’s his birthday, don’t you know? And his health 
will be drunk, and all that sort of thing. What would 
the Banquet be without him?” 

“Ever so much nicer,” said Bruno. But he said it in 
a very low voice, and nobody but Sylvie heard him. 

The Professor chuckled again. “It'll be a jolly Banquet, 
now you’ve come, my little man! I am so glad to see you 
again!” 

“I 'fraid we’ve been very long in coming,” Bruno 
politely remarked. 

“Well, yes,” the Professor assented. “However, you’re 
very short, now you’re come: that’s some comfort.” And 
he went on to enumerate the plans for the day. “The 
Lecture comes first,” he said. “ That the Empress insists 
on. She says people will eat so much at the Banquet, 
they’ll be too sleepy to attend to the Lecture afterwards— 
and perhaps she’s right. There’ll just be a little refresh¬ 
ment, when the people first arrive—as a kind of surprise 
for the Empress, you know. Ever since she’s been—well, 
not quite so clever as she once was—we’ve found it de¬ 
sirable to concoct little surprises for her. Then comes the 
Lecture-” 

“What? The Lecture you were getting ready—ever so 
long ago?” Sylvie enquired. 

“Yes—that’s the one,” the Professor rather reluctantly 
admitted. “It has taken a goodish time to prepare. I’ve 
got so many other things to attend to. For instance, I’m 
Court-Physician. I have to keep all the Royal Servants 
in good health—and that reminds me!” he cried, ringing 
the bell in a great hurry. “This is Medicine-Day! We 
only give Medicine once a week. If we were to begin 
giving it every day, the bottles would soon be empty!” 

“But if they were ill on the other days?” Sylvie sug¬ 
gested. 

“What, ill on the wrong day\” exclaimed the Professor. 



GAMMON AND SPINACH 629 

“Oh, that would never do! A Servant would be dismissed 
at once, who was ill on the wrong day! This is the Medicine 
for to-day ,” he went on, taking down a large jug from a 
shelf. “I mixed it, myself, first thing this morning. Taste 
it!” he said, holding out the jug to Bruno. “Dip in your 
finger, and taste it!” 

Bruno did so, and made such an excruciatingly wry 
face that Sylvie exclaimed in alarm, “Oh, Bruno, you 
mustn’t!” 

“It’s welly extremely nasty!” Bruno said, as his face 
resumed its natural shape. 

“Nasty?” said the Professor. “Why, of course it is! 
What would Medicine be, if it wasn’t nasty ?” 

“Nice,” said Bruno. 

“I was going to say—” the Professor faltered, rather 
taken aback by the promptness of Bruno’s reply, “—that 
that would never do! Medicine has to be nasty, you know. 
Be good enough to take this jug, down into the Servants’ 
Hall,” he said to the footman who answered the bell: 
“and tell them it’s their Medicine for to-day” 

“Which of them is to drink it?” the footman asked, 
as he carried off the jug. 

“Oh, I’ve not settled that yet!” the Professor briskly 
replied. “I’ll come and settle that, soon. Tell them not to 
begin, on any account, till I come! It’s really wonderful”, 
he said, turning to the children, “the success I’ve had in 
curing Diseases! Here are some of my memoranda.” He 
took down from the shelf a heap of little bits of paper, 
pinned together in twos and threes. “Just look at this set, 
now. ‘Under-Cook Number Thirteen recovered from 
Common Fever—Febris Communis.’ And now see what’s 
pinned to it. ‘Gave Under-Cook Number Thirteen a 
Double Dose of Medicine.’ That’s something to be proud 
of, isn’t it}” 

“But which happened first!” said Sylvie, looking very 
much puzzled. 

The Professor examined the papers carefully. “They 
are not dated, I find,” he said with a slightly dejected 



63O SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

air: “so I fear I ca’n’t tell you. But they both happened: 
there’s no doubt of that. The Medicine’s the great thing, 
you know. The Diseases are much less important. You 
can keep a Medicine, for years and years: but nobody 
ever wants to keep a Disease ! By the way, come and 
look at the platform. The Gardener asked me to come 
and see if it would do. We may as well go before it gets 
dark.” 

"We’d like to, very much!” Sylvie replied. “Come, 
Bruno, put on your hat. Don’t keep the dear Professor 
waiting!” 

“Ca’n’t find my hat!” the little fellow sadly replied. 
"I were rolling it about. And it’s rolled itself away!” 

“Maybe it’s rolled in there,” Sylvie suggested, pointing 
to a dark recess, the door of which stood half open: and 
Bruno ran in to look. After a minute he came slowly out 
again, looking very grave, and carefully shut the cup¬ 
board door after him. 

“It aren’t in there,” he said, with such unusual 
solemnity, that Sylvie’s curiosity was aroused. 

“What is in there, Bruno?” 

“There’s cobwebs—and two spiders—” Bruno thought¬ 
fully replied, checking off the catalogue on his fingers, 
“—and the cover of a picture-book—and a tortoise—and 
a dish of nuts—and an old man.” 

“An old man!” cried the Professor, trotting across 
the room in great excitement. “Why, it must be the 
Other Professor, that’s been lost for ever so long!” 

He opened the door of the cupboard wide: and there 
he was, the Other Professor, sitting in a chair, with a 
book on his knee, and in the act of helping himself to 
a nut from a dish, which he had taken down off a shelf 
just within his reach. He looked round at us, but said 
nothing till he had cracked and eaten the nut. Then he 
asked the old question. “Is the Lecture all ready?” 

“It’ll begin in an hour,” the Professor said, evading 
the question. “First, we must have something to surprise 
the Empress. And then comes the Banquet-” 



GAMMON AND SPINACH 


631 

"The Banquet!” cried the Other Professor, springing 
up, and filling the room with a cloud of dust. Then I'd 
better go and—and brush myself a little. What a state 
I’m in!” 

"He does want brushing!” the Professor said, with a 
critical air. "Here’s your hat, little man! I had put it on 
by mistake. I’d quite forgotten I had one on, already. 
Let’s go and look at the platform.” 

"And there’s that nice old Gardener singing still!” 
Bruno exclaimed in delight, as we went out into the 
garden. "I do believe he’s been singing that very song 
ever since we went away!” 

“Why, of course he has!” replied the Professor. "It 
wouldn’t be the thing to leave off, you know.” 

“Wouldn’t be what thing?” said Bruno: but the Pro¬ 
fessor thought it best not to hear the question. “What are 
you doing with that hedgehog?” he shouted at the Gar¬ 
dener, whom they found standing upon one foot, singing 
softly to himself, and rolling a hedgehog up and down 
with the other foot. 

“Well, I wanted fur to know what hedgehogs lives on: 
so I be a-keeping this here hedgehog—fur to see if it eats 
potatoes-” 

"Much better keep a potato,” said the Professor; "and 
see if hedgehogs eat it!” 

"That be the roight way, sure-ly!” the delighted Gar¬ 
dener exclaimed. "Be you come to see the platform?” 

“Aye, aye! ’ ’ the Professor cheerily replied. "And the 
children have come back, you see!” 

The Gardener looked round at them with a grin. Then 
he led the way to the Pavilion; and as he went he sang: 

“He looked again, and found it was 
A Double Rule of Three: 

‘And all its Mystery’, he said, 

‘Is clear as day to me!’ ” 

"You’ve been months over that song,” said the Pro¬ 
fessor. “Isn’t it finished yet?” 



632 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“There be only one verse more,” the Gardener sadly 
replied. And, with tears streaming down his cheeks, he 
sang the last verse: 

"He thought he saw an Argument 
That proved he was the Pope: 

He looked again, and found it was 
A Bar of Mottled Soap. 

“A fact so dread ', he faintly said, 

‘Extinguishes all hope!’ ” 

Choking with sobs, the Gardener hastily stepped on a 
few yards ahead of the party, to conceal his emotion. 

“Did he see the Bar of Mottled Soap?” Sylvie enquired, 
as we followed. 

“Oh, certainly!” said the Professor. “That song is his 
own history, you know.” 

Tears of an ever-ready sympathy glittered in Bruno’s 
eyes. “I’s welly sorry he isn’t the Pope!” he said. “Aren’t 
you sorry, Sylvie?” 

“Well—I hardly know,” Sylvie replied in the vaguest 
manner. “Would it make him any happier?” she asked 
the Professor. 

“It wouldn’t make the Pofe any happier,” said the Pro¬ 
fessor. “Isn’t the platform lovely ?” he asked, as we en¬ 
tered the Pavilion. 

“I’ve put an extra beam under it!” said the Gardener, 
patting it affectionately as he spoke. "And now it’s that 
strong, as—as a mad elephant might dance upon it!” 

“Thank you very much!” the Professor heartily re¬ 
joined. "I don’t know that we shall exactly require—but 
it’s convenient to know.” And he led the children upon 
the platform, to explain the arrangements to them. "Here 
are three seats, you see, for the Emperor and the Empress 
and Prince Uggug. But there must be two more chairs 
here!” he said, looking down at the Gardener. “One for 
Lady Sylvie, and one for the smaller animal!” 

"And may I help in the Lecture?” said Bruno. “I can 
do some conjuring tricks.” 



GAMMON AND SPINACH 633 

“Well, it’s not exactly a conjuring lecture,” the Pro¬ 
fessor said, as he arranged some curious-looking machines 
on the table. “However, what can you do? Did you ever 
go through a table, for instance?” 

“Often!” said Bruno. “ Haven’t I, Sylvie?” 

The Professor was evidently surprised, though he tried 
not to show it. “This must be looked into,” he muttered 
to himself, taking out a note-book. “And first—what kind 
of table?” 

“Tell him!” Bruno whispered to Sylvie, putting his 
arms round her neck. 

"Tell him yourself,” said Sylvie. 

“Ca’n’t,” said Bruno. “It’s a bony word.” 

“Nonsense!” laughed Sylvie. “You can say it well 
enough, if you only try. Come!” 

“Muddle-” said Bruno. “That’s a bit of it.” 

"What does he say?” cried the bewildered Professor. 

“He means the multiplication-table,” Sylvie explained. 

The Professor looked annoyed, and shut up his note¬ 
book again. “Oh, that’s quite another thing,” he said. 

“It are ever so many other things,” said Bruno. “Aren't 
it, Sylvie?” 

A loud blast of trumpets interrupted this conversation. 
“Why, the entertainment has begun\” the Professor ex¬ 
claimed, as he hurried the children into the Reception- 
Saloon. “I had no idea it was so late!” 

A small table, containing cake and wine, stood in a 
corner of the Saloon; and here we found the Emperor 
and Empress waiting for us. The rest of the Saloon had 
been cleared of furniture, to make room for the guests. I 
was much struck by the great change a few months had 
made in the faces of the Imperial Pair. A vacant stare was 
now the Emperor's usual expression; while over the face 
of the Empress there flitted, ever and anon, a meaningless 
smile. 

“So you’re come at last!” the Emperor sulkily re¬ 
marked, as the Professor and the children took their 
places. It was evident that he was very much out of 



634 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

temper: and we were not long in learning the cause of this. 
He did not consider the preparations, made for the Im¬ 
perial party, to be such as suited their rank. “A common 
mahogany table!” he growled, pointing to it contemp¬ 
tuously with his thumb. ‘‘Why wasn’t it made of gold, 
I should like to know?” 

‘‘It would have taken a very long-” the Professor 

began, but the Emperor cut the sentence short. 

‘‘Then the cake! Ordinary plum! Why wasn’t it made 

of—of-” He broke off again. ‘‘Then the wine! Merely 

old Madeira! Why wasn’t it-? Then this chair! That’s 

worst of all. Why wasn’t it a throne? One might excuse 
the other omissions, but I ca'n’t get over the chair!” 

‘‘What I ca’n’t get over”, said the Empress, in eager 
sympathy with her angry husband, ‘‘is the tablet” 

“Pooh!” said the Emperor. 

"It is much to be regretted!” the Professor mildly re¬ 
plied, as soon as he had a chance of speaking. After a 
moment’s thought he strengthened the remark. “ Every¬ 
thing ”, he said, addressing Society in general, "is very 
much to be regretted!” 

A murmur of "Hear, hear!” rose from the crowded 
Saloon. 

There was a rather awkward pause: the Professor evi¬ 
dently didn’t know how to begin. The Empress leant 
forwards, and whispered to him. “A few jokes, you know. 
Professor—just to put people at their ease!” 

"True, true, Madam!” the Professor meekly replied. 
“This little boy-” 

“Please don’t make any jokes about me!” Bruno ex¬ 
claimed, his eyes filling with tears. 

"I wo’n't if you’d rather I didn’t,” said the kind-hearted 
Professor. "It was only something about a Ship’s Buoy: 
a harmless pun—but it doesn’t matter.” Here he turned 
to the crowd and addressed them in a loud voice. "Learn 
your A’s!” he shouted. "Your B’s! Your C’s! and your 
D’s! Then you’ll be at your ease!” 

There was a roar of laughter from all the assembly, 



GAMMON AND SPINACH 635 

and then a great deal of confused whispering. “What was 
it he said? Something about bees, I fancy-” 

The Empress smiled in her meaningless way, and 
fanned herself. The poor Professor looked at her timidly: 
he was clearly at his wits’ end again, and hoping for 
another hint. The Empress whispered again. 

“Some spinach, you know, Professor, as a surprise.’’ 

The Professor beckoned to the Head-Cook, and said 
something to him in a low voice. Then the Head-Cook 
left the room, followed by all the other cooks. 

“It’s difficult to get things started,” the Professor re¬ 
marked to Bruno. “When once we get started, it’ll go on 
all right, you’ll see.” 

“If 00 want to startle people”, said Bruno, “00 should 
put live frogs on their backs.” 

Here the cooks all came in again, in a procession, the 
Head-Cook coming last and carrying something, which 
the others tried to hide by waving flags all round it. 
“Nothing but flags, Your Imperial Highness! Nothing 
but flags!” he kept repeating, as he set it before her. Then 
all the flags were dropped in a moment, as the Head- 
Cook raised the cover from an enormous dish. 

“What is it?” the Empress said faintly, as she put her 
spy-glass to her eye. “Why, it's Spinach, I declare!” 

“Her Imperial Highness is surprised,” the Professor 
explained to the attendants: and some of them clapped 
their hands. The Head-Cook made a low bow, and in 
doing so dropped a spoon on the table, as if by accident, 
just within reach of the Empress, who looked the other 
way and pretended not to see it. 

“I am surprised!” the Empress said to Bruno. “Aren’t 
you?” 

“Not a bit,” said Bruno. “I heard-” but Sylvie put 

her hand over his mouth, and spoke for him. “He’s rather 
tired, I think. He w r ants the Lecture to begin.” 

“I want the supper to begin,” Bruno corrected her. 

The Empress took up the spoon in an absent manner, 
and tried to balance it across the back of her hand, and 



636 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

in doing this she dropped it into the dish: and, when she 
took it out again, it was full of spinach. "How curious!" 
she said, and put it into her mouth. "It tastes just like 
real spinach! I thought it was an imitation—but I do 
believe it’s real!” And she took another spoonful. 

"It wo’n’t be real much longer,” said Bruno. 

But the Empress had had enough spinach by this time, 
and somehow—I failed to notice the exact process—we 
all found ourselves in the Pavilion, and the Professor in 
the act of beginning the long-expected Lecture. 


Chapter XXI 
The Professor’s Lecture 

"In Science—in fact, in most things—it is usually best 
to begin at the beginning. In some things, of course, it’s 
better to begin at the other end. For instance, if you 
wanted to paint a dog green, it might be best to begin 
with the tail, as it doesn’t bite at that end. And so-” 

"May I help 00?” Bruno interrupted. 

"Help me to do whatV’ said the puzzled Professor, 
looking up for a moment, but keeping his finger on the 
book he was reading from, so as not to lose his place. 

"To paint a dog green!” cried Bruno. “Oo can begin 
wiz its mouf, and I’ll-” 

“No, no!” said the Professor. “We haven’t got to the 
Experiments yet. And so”, returning to his note-book, 
"I’ll give you the Axioms of Science. After that I shall 
exhibit some Specimens. Then I shall explain a Process 
or two. And I shall conclude with a few Experiments. An 
Axiom, you know, is a thing that you accept without 
contradiction. For instance, if I were to say ‘Here we are!’, 
that would be accepted without any contradiction, and 
it’s a nice sort of remark to begin a conversation with. So 
it would be an Axiom. Or again, supposing I were to say, 
‘Here we are not!’, that would be—” 



THE PROFESSOR’S LECTURE 


63 7 


“—a fib!” cried Bruno. 

“Oh, Brunol” said Sylvie in a warning whisper. “Of 
course it would be an Axiom, if the Professor said it!” 

“—that would be accepted, if people were civil,” con¬ 
tinued the Professor; “so it would be another Axiom.” 

“It might be an Axledum,” Bruno said: “but it wouldn’t 
be truel” 

"Ignorance of Axioms”, the Lecturer continued, “is a 
great drawback in life. It wastes so much time to have 
to say them over and over again. For instance, take the 
Axiom, 'Nothing is greater than itself; that is, 'Nothing 
can contain itself.' How often you hear people say ‘He 
was so excited, he was quite unable to contain himself.’ 
Why, of course he was unable! The excitement had nothing 
to do with it!” 

“I say, look here, you know!” said the Emperor, who 
was getting a little restless. “How many Axioms are you 
going to give us? At this rate, we sha’n't get to the Ex¬ 
periments till to-morrow-week!” 

"Oh, sooner than that, I assure you!” the Professor 
replied, looking up in alarm. “There are only,” (he re¬ 
ferred to his notes again) "only two more, that are really 
necessary.” 

“Read ’em out, and get on to the Specimens,” grumbled 
the Emperor. 

“The First Axiom”, the Professor read out in a great 
hurry, “consists of these words, ‘Whatever is, is.’ And the 
Second consists of these words, 'Whatever isn’t, isn’t.' We 
will now go on to the Specimens. The first tray contains 
Crystals and other Things.” He drew it towards him, 
and again referred to his notebook. "Some of the labels 

—owing to insufficient adhesion-” Here he stopped 

again, and carefully examined the page with his eye¬ 
glass. “I ca’n’t read the rest of the sentence,” he said at 
last, “but it means that the labels have come loose, and 
the Things have got mixed-” 

“Let me stick ’em on again!” cried Bruno eagerly, and 
began licking them, like postage-stamps, and dabbing 



638 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

them down upon the Crystals and the other Things. But 
the Professor hastily moved the tray out of his reach. 
“They might get fixed to the wrong Specimens, you 
know!” he said. 

“Oo shouldn’t have any wrong peppermints in the 
tray!” Bruno boldly replied. “Should he, Sylvie?” 

But Sylvie only shook her head. 

The Professor heard him not. He had taken up one 
of the bottles, and was carefully reading the label through 

his eye-glass. “Our first Specimen-” he announced, as 

he placed the bottle in front of the other Things, “is— 

that is, it is called-” here he took it up, and examined 

the label again, as if he thought it might have changed 
since he last saw it, “is called Aqua Pura—common 
water—the fluid that cheers—” 

“Hip! Hip! Hip!” the Head-Cook began enthusias¬ 
tically. 

“—but not inebriates!” the Professor went on quickly, 
but only just in time to check the “Hooroar!” which was 
beginning. 

“Our second Specimen”, he went on, carefully opening 
a small jar, “is—” here he removed the lid, and a large 
beetle instantly darted out, and with an angry buzz 
went straight out of the Pavilion, “—is—or rather, I 
should say,” looking sadly into the empty jar, “it was — 
a curious kind of Blue Beetle. Did anyone happen to re¬ 
mark—as it went past—three blue spots under each 
wing?” 

Nobody had remarked them. 

“Ah, well!” the Professor said with a sigh. “It’s a pity. 
Unless you remark that kind of thing at the moment, it’s 
very apt to get overlooked! The next Specimen, at any 
rate, will not fly away! It is—in short, or perhaps, more 

correctly, at length —an Elephant. You will observe-” 

Here he beckoned to the Gardener to come up on the 
platform, and with his help began putting together what 
looked like an enormous dog-kennel, with short tubes 
projecting out of it on both sides. 



THE PROFESSOR’S LECTURE 639 

“But we’ve seen Elephants before,” the Emperor 
grumbled. 

"Yes, but not through a Megaloscopel” the Professor 
eagerly replied. “You know you ca’n’t see a Flea, prop¬ 
erly, without a magnifying-glass —what we call a Micro¬ 
scope. Well, just in the same way, you ca’n’t see an 
Elephant, properly without a minimifying-g lass. There’s 
one in each of these little tubes. And this is a Megaloscopel 
The Gardener will now bring in the next Specimen. 
Please open both curtains, down at the end there, and 
make way for the Elephant!” 

There was a general rush to the sides of the Pavilion, 
and all eyes were turned to the open end, watching for 
the return of the Gardener, who had gone away singing 
'‘He thought he saw an Elephant That practised on a 
Fife!” There was silence for a minute: and then his 
harsh voice was heard again in the distance. ‘‘He looked 
again —come up then! He looked again, and found it 
was —woa back! and found it was A letter from his — 
make way there! He’s a-coming!” 

And in marched or waddled—it is hard to say which is 
the right word—an Elephant, on its hind-legs, and play¬ 
ing on an enormous fife which it held with its fore-feet. 

The Professor hastily threw open a large door at the 
end of the Megaloscope, and the huge animal, at a signal 
from the Gardener, dropped the fife, and obediently 
trotted into the machine, the door of which was at once 
shut by the Professor. “The Specimen is now ready for 
observation!” he proclaimed. “It is exactly the size of the 
common Mouse —Mus Communis!” 

There was a general rush to the tubes, and the spec¬ 
tators watched with delight the minikin creature, as it 
playfully coiled its trunk round the Professor’s extended 
finger, finally taking its stand upon the palm of his hand, 
while he carefully lifted it out, and carried it off to ex¬ 
hibit to the Imperial party. 

“Isn’t it a darling ?” cried Bruno. “May I stroke it, 
please? I’ll touch it welly gentfy!” 



640 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

The Empress inspected it solemnly with her eye-glass. 
“It is very small,” she said in a deep voice. “Smaller than 
elephants usually are, I believe?” 

The Professor gave a start of delighted surprise. “Why, 
that’s truel” he murmured to himself. Then louder, turn¬ 
ing to the audience, “Her Imperial Highness has made a 
remark which is perfectly sensible!” And a wild cheer 
arose from that vast multitude. 

“The next Specimen”, the Professor proclaimed, after 
carefully placing the little elephant in the tray, among 
the Crystals and other things, “is a Flea, which we will 
enlarge for the purposes of observation.” Taking a small 
pill-box from the tray, he advanced to the Megaloscope, 
and reversed all the tubes. “The Specimen is ready!” he 
cried, with his eye at one of the tubes, while he carefully 
emptied the pill-box through a little hole at the side. “It 
is now the size of the Common Horse —Equus Com¬ 
munis!” 

There was another general rush, to look through dhe 
tubes, and the Pavilion rang with shouts of delight, 
through which the Professor’s anxious tones could scarcely 
be heard. “Keep the door of the Microscope shutl” he cried. 

“If the creature were to escape, this size, it would-” 

But the mischief was done. The door had swung open, 
and in another moment the Monster had got out, and 
was trampling down the terrified, shrieking spectators. 

But the Professor’s presence of mind did not desert 
him. “Undraw those curtains!” he shouted. It was done. 
The Monster gathered its legs together, and in one tre¬ 
mendous bound vanished into the sky. 

“Where is it?” said the Emperor, rubbing his eyes. 

“In the next Province, I fancy,” the Professor replied. 
“That jump would take it at least five miles! The next 
thing is to explain a Process or two. But I find there is 
hardly room enough to operate—the smaller animal is 
rather in my way-” 

“Who does he mean?” Bruno whispered to Sylvie. 

“He means you\” Sylvie whispered back. “Hush!” 



THE PROFESSOR’S LECTURE 


641 

"Be kind enough to move—angularly—to this corner," 
the Professor said, addressing himself to Bruno. 

Bruno hastily moved his chair in the direction indi¬ 
cated. "Did I move angrily enough?” he inquired. But 
the Professor was once more absorbed in his Lecture, 
which he was reading from his note-book. 

"I will now explain the process of—the name is blotted, 
I’m sorry to say. It will be illustrated by a number of— 

of-” here he examined the pages for some time, and at 

last said “It seems to be either ‘Experiments’ or ‘Speci¬ 
mens’-” 

"Let it be Experiments,” said the Emperor. "We've 
seen plenty of Specimens .” 

"Certainly, certainly!” the Professor assented. "We will 
have some Experiments.” 

“May I do them?” Bruno eagerly asked. 

"Oh dear no!” The Professor looked dismayed. "I really 
don’t know what would happen if you did them!” 

"Nor nobody doosn’t know what’ll happen if 00 doos 
them!” Bruno retorted. 

"Our First Experiment requires a Machine. It has two 
knobs—only two —you can count them, if you like.” 

The Head-Cook stepped forwards, counted them, and 
retired satisfied. 

"Now you might press those two knobs together—but 
that’s not the way to do it. Or you might turn the Ma¬ 
chine upside-down—but that’s not the way to do it!” 

"What are the way to do it?” said Bruno, who was 
listening very attentively. 

The Professor smiled benignantly. "Ah, yes!” he said, 
in a voice like the heading of a chapter. "The Way To 
Do It! Permit me!” and in a moment he had whisked 
Bruno upon the table. “I divide my subject”, he began, 
"into three parts-” 

“I think I’ll get down!” Bruno whispered to Sylvie. 
"It aren’t nice to be divided!” 

"He hasn’t got a knife, silly boy!” Sylvie whispered 
in reply. “Stand still! You'll break all the bottles!” 



642 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

"The first part is to take hold of the knobs,” putting 

them into Bruno’s hands. "The second part is-” Here 

he turned the handle, and, with a loud "Oh!”, Bruno 
dropped both the knobs, and began rubbing his elbows. 

The Professor chuckled in delight. "It had a sensible 
effect. Hadn’t it?” he enquired. 

"No, it hadn’t a sensible effect!” Bruno said indignant¬ 
ly. "It were very silly indeed. It jingled my elbows, and 
it banged my back, and it crinkled my hair, and it buzzed 
among my bones! ’’ 

“I’m sure it didn’t !” said Sylvie. "You’re only invent¬ 
ing!” 

“Oo doesn’t know nuffin about it!” Bruno replied. 
"Oo wasn’t there to see. Nobody ca’n’t go among my 
bones. There isn’t room!” 

"Our Second Experiment”, the Professor announced, 
as Bruno returned to his place, still thoughtfully rubbing 
his elbows, "is the production of that seldom-seen-but- 
greatly-to-be-admired phenomenon, Black Light! You 
have seen White Light, Red Light, Green Light, and so 
on: but never, till this wonderful day, have any eyes but 
mine seen Black Lightl This box”, carefully lifting it 
upon the table, and covering it with a heap of blankets, 
"is quite full of it. The way I made it was this—I took 
a lighted candle into a dark cupboard and shut the door. 
Of course the cupboard was then full of Yellow Light. 
Then I took a bottle of Black ink, and poured it over the 
candle: and, to my delight, every atom of the Yellow 
Light turned Black ! That was indeed the proudest 
moment of my life! Then I filled a box with it. And now 
—would anyone like to get under the blankets and see 
it?” 

Dead silence followed this appeal: but at last Bruno 
said “I’ll get under, if it won’t jingle my elbows.” 

Satisfied on this point, Bruno crawled under the 
blankets, and, after a minute or two, crawled out again, 
very hot and dusty, and with his hair in the wildest 
confusion. 



THE PROFESSOR’S LECTURE 643 

“What did you see in the box?’’ Sylvie eagerly en¬ 
quired. 

“I saw nuffinY’ Bruno sadly replied. “It were too dark!” 

“He has described the appearance of the thing exactly!” 
the Professor exclaimed with enthusiasm. “Black Light, 
and Nothing, look so extremely alike, at first sight, that 
I don't wonder he failed to distinguish them! We will 
now proceed to the Third Experiment.” 

The Professor came down, and led the way to where 
a post had been driven firmly into the ground. To one 
side of the post was fastened a chain, with an iron weight 
hooked on to the end of it, and from the other side 
projected a piece of whalebone, with a ring at the end 
of it. “This is a most interesting Experiment!” the Pro¬ 
fessor announced. “It will need time, I’m afraid: but that 
is a trifling disadvantage. Now observe. If I were to un¬ 
hook this weight, and let go, it would fall to the ground. 
You do not deny that ? ” 

Nobody denied it. 

“And in the same way, if I were to bend this piece of 
whalebone round the post—thus—and put the ring over 
this hook—thus—it stays bent: but, if I unhook it, it 
straightens itself again. You do not deny that?” 

Again, nobody denied it. 

“Well, now, suppose we left things just as they are, 
for a long time. The force of the whalebone would get 
exhausted, you know, and it would stay bent, even when 
you unhooked it. Now, why shouldn’t the same thing 
happen with the weight ? The whalebone gets so used 
to being bent, that it ca’n’t straighten itself any more. 
Why shouldn’t the weight get so used to being held up, 
that it ca’n’t fall any more? That’s what I want to 
know!” 

“That’s what we want to know!” echoed the crowd. 

“How long must we wait?” grumbled the Emperor. 

The Professor looked at his watch. “Well, I think a 
thousand years will do to begin with,” he said. "Then 
we will cautiously unhook the weight: and, if it still 



644 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

shows (as perhaps it will) a slight tendency to fall, we 
will hook it on to the chain again, and leave it for another 
thousand years.” 

Here the Empress experienced one of those flashes of 
Common Sense which were the surprise of all around 
her. “Meanwhile there’ll be time for another Experiment,” 
she said. 

“There will indeedl” cried the delighted Professor. “Let 
us return to the platform, and proceed to the Fourth Ex¬ 
periment!” 

“For this concluding Experiment, I will take a certain 
Alkali, or Acid—I forget which. Now you’ll see what 
will happen when I mix it with Some—” here he took 
up a bottle, and looked at it doubtfully, “—when I mix 
it with—with Something ” 

Here the Emperor interrupted. “What’s the name of 
the stuff?” he asked. 

“I don't remember the name,” said the Professor: “and 
the label has come off.” He emptied it quickly into the 
other bottle, and, with a tremendous bang, both bottles 
flew to pieces, upsetting all the machines, and filling the 
Pavilion with thick black smoke. I sprang to my feet 
in terror, and—and found myself standing before my 
solitary hearth, where the poker, dropping at last from 
the hand of the sleeper, had knocked over the tongs and 
the shovel, and had upset the kettle, filling the air with 
clouds of steam. With a weary sigh, I betook myself 
to bed. 


Chapter XXII 
The Banquet 

“Heaviness may endure for a night: hut joy cometh in the 
morning.” The next day found me quite another being. 
Even the memories of my lost friend and companion were 



THE BANQUET 645 

sunny as the genial weather that smiled around me. I did 
not venture to trouble Lady Muriel, or her father, with 
another call so soon: but took a walk into the country, 
and only turned homewards when the low sunbeams 
warned me that day would soon be over. 

On my way home, I passed the cottage where the old 
man lived, whose face always recalled to me the day 
when I first met Lady Muriel; and I glanced in as I 
passed, half-curious to see if he were still living there. 

Yes: the old man was still alive. He was sitting out 
in the porch, looking just as he did when I first saw him 
at Fay field Junction—it seemed only a few days ago! 

“Good evening!” I said, pausing. 

“Good evening, Maister!” he cheerfully responded. 
“Wo’n’t ee step in?” 

I stepped in, and took a seat on the bench in,the porch. 
“I’m glad to see you looking so hearty,” I began. “Last 
time, I remember, I chanced to pass just as Lady Muriel 
was coming away from the house. Does she still come to 
see you?” 

“Ees,” he answered slowly. “She has na forgotten me. 
I don’t lose her bonny face for many days together. Well 
I mind the very first time she come, after we’d met at 
Railway Station. She told me as she come to mak’ 
amends. Dear child! Only think o’ that! To mak’ 
amends!” 

“To make amends for what?” I enquired. “What could 
she have done to need it?” 

“Well, it were loike this, you see? We were both on 
us a-waiting fur t’ train at t’ Junction. And I had setten 
mysen down upat t’ bench. And Station-Maister, he comes 
and he orders me off—fur t’ male’ room for her Ladyship, 
you understand?” 

“I remember it all,” I said. “I was there myself, that 
day.” 

“Was you, now? Well, an’ she axes my pardon fur’t. 
Think o’ that, now! My pardon! An owd ne’er-do-weel 
like me! Ah! She’s been here many a time, sin’ then. 



646 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

Why, she were in here only yestere’en, as it were, a-sittin’, 
as it might be, where you’re a-sitting now, an’ lookin’ 
sweeter and kinder nor an angel! An’ she says ‘You’ve 
not got your Minnie, now,’ she says, ‘to fettle for ye.’ 
Minnie was my grand-daughter, Sir, as lived wi’ me. 
She died, a matter of two months ago—or it may be three. 
She was a bonny lass—and a good lass, too. Eh, but life 
has been rare an’ lonely without her!” 

He covered his face in his hands: and I waited a minute 
or two, in silence, for him to recover himself. 

“So she says, ‘Just tak' me fur your Minnie!’ she says. 
‘Didna Minnie mak' your tea fur you?’ says she. ‘Ay,’ 
says I. An’ she mak’s the tea. ‘An’ didna Minnie light 
your pipe?’ says she. ‘Ay,’ says I. An’ she lights the pipe 
for me. ‘An’ didna Minnie set out your tea in t’ porch?’ 
An’ I says ‘My dear,’ I says, ‘I'm thinking you’re Minnie 
hersen!’ An’ she cries a bit. We both on us cries a bit-” 

Again I kept silence for a while. 

“An’ while I smokes my pipe, she sits an’ talks to me— 
as loving an’ as pleasant! I'll be bound I thowt it were 
Minnie come again! An’ when she gets up to go, I says 
‘Winnot ye shak’ hands wi’ me?’ says I. An’ she says 
‘Na,’ she says: 'a cannot shak’ hands wi’ thee!” she says.” 

“I’m sorry she said that” I put in, thinking it was the 
only instance I had ever known of pride of rank showing 
itself in Lady Muriel. 

“Bless you, it werena prideY’ said the old man, reading 
my thoughts. “She says ' Your Minnie never shook hands 
wi’ you!’ she says. ‘An’ I’m your Minnie now,’ she says. 
An’ she just puts her dear arms about my neck—and she 
kisses me on t’ cheek—an’ may God in Heaven bless 
her!” And here the poor old man broke down entirely, 
and could say no more. 

“God bless her!” I echoed. “And good night to you!” 
I pressed his hand, and left him. "Lady Muriel,” I said 
softly to myself as I went homewards, "truly you know 
how to ‘mak’ amends’!” 

Seated once more by my lonely fireside, I tried to recall 



THE BANQUET 647 

the strange vision of the night before, and to conjure up 
the face of the dear old Professor among the blazing 
coals. “That black one—with just a touch of red—would 
suit him well,” I thought. “After such a catastrophe, it 
would be sure to be covered with black stains—and he 
would say: 

“The result of that combination—you may have no¬ 
ticed?—was an Explosion ! Shall I repeat the Experi¬ 
ment?” 

“No, no! Don’t trouble yourself!” was the general cry. 
And we all trooped off, in hot haste, to the Banqueting- 
Hall, where the feast had already begun. 

No time was lost in helping the dishes, and very 
speedily every guest found his plate filled with good 
things. 

“I have always maintained the principle,” the Pro¬ 
fessor began, “that it is a good rule to take some food— 

occasionally. The great advantage of dinner-parties-” 

he broke off suddenly. “Why, actually here’s the Other 
Professor!” he cried. “And there’s no place left for him!” 

The Other Professor came in reading a large book, 
which he held close to his eyes. One result of his not 
looking where he was going was that he tripped up, as 
he crossed the Saloon, flew up into the air, and fell 
heavily on his face in the middle of the table. 

“What a pity!” cried the kind-hearted Professor, as he 
helped him up. 

“It wouldn’t be me, if I didn’t trip,” said the Other 
Professor. 

The Professor looked much shocked. “Almost anything 
would be better than that\” he exclaimed. “It never does”, 
he added, aside to Bruno, “to be anybody else, does 
it?” 

To which Bruno gravely replied “I’s got nuflin on my 
plate.” 

The Professor hastily put on, his spectacles, to make 
sure that the facts were all right, to begin with: then he 
turned his jolly round face upon the unfortunate owner 



648 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

of the empty plate. "And what would you like next, my 
little man?” 

"Well,” Bruno said, a little doubtfully, "I think I'll 
take some plum-pudding, please—while I think of it.” 

"Oh, Bruno!” (This was a whisper from Sylvie.) “It 
isn’t good manners to ask for a dish before it comes!” 

And Bruno whispered back "But I might forget to ask 
for some, when it comes, 00 know—I do forget things, 
sometimes,” he added, seeing Sylvie about to whisper 
more. 

And this assertion Sylvie did not venture to contradict. 

Meanwhile a chair had been placed for the Other Pro¬ 
fessor, between the Empress and Sylvie. Sylvie found him 
a rather uninteresting neighbour: in fact, she couldn’t 
afterwards remember that he had made more than one 
remark to her during the whole banquet, and that was 
“What a comfort a Dictionary is!” (She told Bruno, 
afterwards, that she had been too much afraid of him to 
say more than "Yes, Sir” in reply: and that had been the 
end of their conversation. On which Bruno expressed a 
very decided opinion that that wasn't worth calling a 
"conversation” at all. “Oo should have asked him a 
riddle!” he added triumphantly. "Why, I asked the Pro¬ 
fessor three riddles! One was that one you asked me in 
the morning, ‘How many pennies is there in two shil¬ 
lings?’ And another was-” "Oh, Bruno!” Sylvie inter¬ 

rupted. “That wasn’t a riddle!” "It wereV ’ Bruno fiercely 
replied.) 

By this time a waiter had supplied Bruno with a plate¬ 
ful of something, which drove the plum-pudding out of 
his head. 

"Another advantage of dinner-parties”, the Professor 
cheerfully explained, for the benefit of anyone that would 
listen, "is that it helps you to see your friends. If you 
want to see a man, offer him something to eat. It’s the 
same rule with a mouse.” 

"This Cat’s very kind to the Mouses,” Bruno said, 
stooping to stroke a remarkably fat specimen of the race, 



THE BANQUET 649 

that had just waddled into the room, and was rubbing 
itself affectionately against the leg of his chair. "Please, 
Sylvie, pour some milk in your saucer. Pussie’s ever so 
thirsty!” 

"Why do you want my saucer?” said Sylvie. "You’ve 
got one yourself!” 

“Yes, I know,” said Bruno: "but I wanted mine for to 
give it some more milk in.” 

Sylvie looked unconvinced: however it seemed quite 
impossible for her ever to refuse what her brother asked: 
so she quietly filled her saucer with milk, and handed it 
to Bruno, who got down off his chair to administer it to 
the cat. 

“The room’s very hot, with all this crowd,” the Pro¬ 
fessor said to Sylvie. "I wonder why they don’t put some 
lumps of ice in the grate? You fill it with lumps of coal in 
the winter, you know, and you sit around it and enjoy the 
warmth. How jolly it would be to fill it now with lumps 
of ice, and sit round it and enjoy the coolth!” 

Hot as it was, Sylvie shivered a little at the idea. "It’s 
very cold outside,” she said. "My feet got almost frozen 
to-day.” 

"That’s the shoemaker’s fault!” the Professor cheerfully 
replied. "How often I’ve explained to him that he ought 
to make boots with little iron frames under the soles, 
to hold lamps! But he never thinks. No one would suffer 
from cold, if only they would think of those little things. 
I always use hot ink, myself, in the winter. Very few 
people ever think of thatl Yet how simple it is!” 

"Yes, it’s very simple,” Sylvie said politely. "Has the 
cat had enough?” This wa,s to Bruno, who had brought 
back the saucer only half-emptied. 

But Bruno did not hear the question. "There’s some¬ 
body scratching at the door and wanting to come in,” he 
said. And he scrambled down off his chair, and went and 
cautiously peeped out through the door-way. 

“Who was it wanted to come in?” Sylvie asked, as he 
returned to his place. 



650 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“It were a Mouse,” said Bruno. "And it peepted in. 
And it saw the Cat. And it said ‘I’ll come in another day.’ 
And I said ‘Oo needn’t be flightened. The Cat’s welly kind 
to Mouses.’ And it said ‘But I’s got some imporkant busi¬ 
ness, what I must attend to.' And it said ‘I’ll call again 
to-morrow.’ And it said ‘Give my love to the Cat.’ ” 

“What a fat cat it is!” said the Lord Chancellor, lean¬ 
ing across the Professor to address his small neighbour. 
"It’s quite a wonder!” 

“It was awfully fat when it earned in,” said Bruno: 
“so it would.be more wonderfuller if it got thin all in a 
minute.” 

“And that was the reason, I suppose,” the Lord Chan¬ 
cellor suggested, “why you didn’t give it the rest of the 
milk?” 

“No,” said Bruno. "It was a betterer reason. I tooked 
the saucer up 'cause it were so discontented!” 

“It doesn’t look so to me,” said the Lord Chancellor. 
“What made you think it was discontented?” 

“ 'Cause it grumbled in its throat.” 

“Oh, Bruno!” cried Sylvie. “Why, that’s the way cats 
show they’re pleased ! ’' 

Bruno looked doubtful. “It's not a good way,” he ob¬ 
jected. “Oo wouldn’t say I were pleased, if I made that 
noise in my throat!” 

“What a singular boy!” the Lord Chancellor whispered 
to himself: but Bruno had caught the words. 

“What do it mean to say ‘a singular boy’?” he whis¬ 
pered to Sylvie. 

“It means one boy,” Sylvie whispered in return. “And 
plural means two or three.” 

“Then I’s welly glad I is a singular boy!” Bruno said 
with great emphasis. “It would be horrid to be two or 
three boys! P'raps they wouldn't play with me!” 

“Why should they?” said the Other Professor, suddenly 
waking up out of a deep reverie. “They might be asleep, 
you know.” 

“Couldn’t, if I was awake,” Bruno said cunningly. 



THE BANQUET 65I 

"Oh, but they might indeed!" the Other Professor pro¬ 
tested. "Boys don’t all go to sleep at once, you know. So 
these boys—but who are you talking about?" 

"He never remembers to ask that first!” the Professor 
whispered to the children. 

"Why, the rest of me, a-course!" Bruno exclaimed 
triumphantly. "Supposing I was two or three boys!” 

The Other Professor sighed, and seemed to be sinking 
back into his reverie; but suddenly brightened up again, 
and addressed the Professor. "There’s nothing more to be 
done now, is there?” 

"Well, there’s the dinner to finish,” the Professor said 
with a bewildered smile: "and the heat to bear. I hope 
you’ll enjoy the dinner—such as it is; and that you wo’n’t 
mind the heat—such as it isn't.” 

The sentence sounded well, but somehow I couldn’t 
quite understand it; and the Other Professor seemed to 
be no better off. "Such as it isn’t what?” he peevishly 
enquired. 

“It isn’t as hot as it might be,” the Professor replied, 
catching at the first idea that came to hand. 

"Ah, I see what you mean now\” the Other Professor 
graciously remarked. "It’s very badly expressed, but I 
quite see it now\ Thirteen minutes and a half ago,” he 
went on, looking first at Bruno and then at his watch as 
he spoke, "you said 'this Cat's very kind to the Mouses.’ 
It must be a singular animal!” 

"So it are’' said Bruno, after carefully examining the 
Cat, to make sure how many there were of it. 

"But how do you know it’s kind to the Mouses—or, 
more correctly speaking, the Mice?” 

“ ’Cause it plays with the Mouses,” said Bruno; "for to 
amuse them, oo know.” 

“But that is just what I don’t know,” the Other Pro¬ 
fessor rejoined. “My belief is, it plays with them to kill 
them!” 

"Oh, that’s quite a accidentl” Bruno began, so eagerly, 
that it was evident he had already propounded this very 



652 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

difficulty to the Cat. “It ’splained all that to me, while it 
were drinking the milk. It said ‘I teaches the Mouses new 
games: the Mouses likes it ever so much.’ It said ‘Some¬ 
times little accidents happens: sometimes the Mouses kills 
theirselves.’ It said Ts always welly sorry, when the 

Mouses kills theirselves.’ It said-’’ 

“If it was so very sorry,’’ Sylvie said, rather disdain¬ 
fully, “it wouldn’t eat the Mouses after they’d killed 
themselves!” 

But this difficulty, also, had evidently not been lost 
sight of in the exhaustive ethical discussion just con¬ 
cluded. "It said-” (the orator constantly omitted, as 

superfluous, his own share in the dialogue, and merely 
gave us the replies of the Cat) “It said ‘Dead Mouses never 
objecks to be eaten.’ It said ‘There's no use wasting good 

Mouses.’ It said ‘Wifful-’ sumfinoruvver. It said ‘And 

00 may live to say “How much I wiss I had the Mouse 

that then I frew away!” ’ It said-” 

“It hadn’t time to say such a lot of things!” Sylvie 
interrupted indignantly. 

“Oo doesn’t know how Cats speaks!” Bruno rejoined 
contemptuously. “Cats speaks welly quick!” 


Chapter XXIII 
The Pig-Tale 

By this time the appetites of the guests seemed to be 
nearly satisfied, and even Bruno had the resolution to 
say, when the Professor offered him a fourth slice of 
plum-pudding, “I thinks three helpings is enough!” 

Suddenly the Professor started as if he had been electri¬ 
fied. “Why, I had nearly forgotten the most important 
part of the entertainment! The Other Professor is to 
recite a Tale of a Pig—I mean a Pig-Tale,” he corrected 



THE PIG-TALE 653 

himself. “It has Introductory Verses at the beginning, 
and at the end.” 

“It ca’n't have Introductory Verses at the end, can it?” 
said Sylvie. 

“Wait till you hear it,” said the Professor: “then you’ll 
see. I’m not sure it hasn’t some in the middle, as well.” 
Here he rose to his feet, and there was an instant silence 
through the Banqueting-Hall: they evidently expected a 
speech. 

“Ladies, and gentlemen,” the Professor began, “the 
Other Professor is so kind as to recite a Poem. The title of 
it is ‘The Pig-Tale’. He never recited it before!” (General 
cheering among the guests.) “He will never recite it 
again!” (Frantic excitement, and wild cheering all down 
the hall, the Professor himself mounting the table in hot 
haste, to lead the cheering, and waving his spectacles in 
one hand and a spoon in the other.) 

Then the Other Professor got up, and began: 

Little Birds are dining 
Warily and well, 

Hid in mossy cell: 

Hid, I say, by waiters 

Gorgeous in their gaiters — 

I’ve a Tale to tell. 


Little Birds are feeding 
Justices with jam. 

Rich in frizzled ham: 
Rich, I say, in oysters 
Haunting shady cloisters — 
That is what I am. 

Little Birds are teaching 
Tigresses to smile, 
Innocent of guile: 

Smile, I say, not smirkle — 
Mouth a semicircle. 

That’s the proper style. 



654 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

Little Birds are sleeping 
A ll among the pins, 

Where the loser wins: 

Where, I say, he sneezes 
When and how he pleases — 

So the Tale begins. 

There was a Pig that sat alone 
Beside a ruined Pump: 

By day and night he made his moan — 

It would have stirred a heart of stone 
To see him wring his hoofs and groan, 
Because he could not jump. 

A certain Camel heard him shout — 

A Camel with a hump. 

“Oh, is it Grief, or is it Gout? 

What is this bellowing about?" 

That Pig replied, with quivering snout, 
“Because I cannot jump!” 

That Camel scanned him, dreamy-eyed. 

“Methinks you are too plump. 

I never knew a Pig so wide — 

That wobbled so from side to side —- 
Who could, however much he tried, 

Do such a thing as jump! 

“ Yet mark those trees, two miles away, 
All clustered in a clump: 

If you could trot there twice a day, 

Nor ever pause for rest or play, 

In the far future—Who can say ?—• 

You may befit to jump.” 

That Camel passed, and left him there, 
Beside the ruined Pump. 

Oh, horrid was that Pig’s despair! 

His shrieks of anguish filled the air. 

He wrung his hoofs, he rent his hair, 
Because he could not jump. 



THE PIG-TALE 


655 


There was a Frog that wandered by — 

A sleek and shining lump: 

Inspected him with fishy eye, 

And said “O Pig, what makes you cry?” 
And bitter was that Pig’s reply, 

“Because I cannot jump !” 

That Frog he grinned a grin of glee, 

And hit his chest a thump. 

“O Pig,” he said, “be ruled by me, 

And you shall see what you shall see. 

This minute, for a trifling fee, 

I'll teach you how to jump! 

"You may be faint from many a fall. 

And bruised by many a bump: 

But, if you persevere through all, 

And practise first on something small, 
Concluding with a ten-foot wall, 

You’ll find that you can jump!” 

That Pig looked up with joyful start: 

“Oh Frog, you are a trump! 

Your words have healed my inward smart — 
Come, name your fee and do your part: 
Bring comfort to a broken heart, 

By teaching me to jump!” 

“My fee shall be a mutton-chop. 

My goal this ruined Pump. 

Observe with what an airy flop 
I plant myself upon the top! 

Now bend your knees and take a hop, 

For that’s the way to jump!” 

Uprose that Pig, and rushed, full whack, 
Against the ruined Pump: 

Rolled over like an empty sack, 

And settled down upon his back, 

While all his bones at once went ‘‘Crack!” 

It was a fatal jump. 



656 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

When the Other Professor had recited this Verse, he 
went across to the fire-place, and put his head up the 
chimney. In doing this, he lost his balance, and fell head¬ 
first into the empty grate, and got so firmly fixed there 
that it was some time before he could be dragged out 
again. 

Bruno had had time to say “I thought he wanted to 
see how many peoples was up the chimbley.” 

And Sylvie had said “Chimney —not chimbley.” 

And Bruno had said “Don’t talk 'ubbish!” 

All this, while the Other Professor was being extracted. 

“You must have blacked your face!” the Empress said 
anxiously. “Let me send for some soap?” 

“Thanks, no,” said the Other Professor, keeping his 
face turned away. “Black’s quite a respectable colour. 
Besides, soap would be no use without water-” 

Keeping his back well turned away from the audience, 
he went on with the Introductory Verses: 

Little Birds are writing 
Interesting books. 

To be read by cooks: 

Read, I say, not roasted — 

Letterpress, when toasted. 

Loses its good looks. 

Little Birds are playing 
Bagpipes on the shore, 

Where the tourists snore: 

“Thanks!” they cry. Tis thrilling! 

Take, oh take this shilling! 

Let us have no more!” 

Little Birds are bathing 
Crocodiles in cream. 

Like a happy dream: 

Like, but not so lasting — 

Crocodiles, when fasting. 

Are not all they seem! 



THE PIG-TALE 


657 


That Camel passed, as Day grew dim 
Around the ruined Pump. 

“O broken heart! O broken limb! 

It needs”, that Camel said to him, 

“Something more fairy-like and slim, 

To execute a jump!” 

That Pig lay still as any stone. 

And could not stir a stump: 

Nor ever, if the truth were known, 

Was he again observed to moan. 

Nor ever wring his hoofs and groan, 

Because he could not jump. 

That Frog made no remark, for he 
Was dismal as a dump: 

He knew the consequence must be 
That he would never get his fee — 

And still he sits, in miserie, 

Upon that ruined Pump! 

“It’s a miserable story!” said Bruno. “It begins miser¬ 
ably, and it ends miserablier. I think I shall cry. Sylvie, 
please lend me your handkerchief.” 

“I haven’t got it with me,” Sylvie whispered. 

“Then I wo'n’t cry,” said Bruno manfully. 

“There are more Introductory Verses to come,” said 
the Other Professor, “but I'm hungry.” He sat down, cut 
a large slice of cake, put it on Bruno’s plate, and gazed at 
his own empty plate in astonishment. 

“Where did you get that cake?” Sylvie whispered to 
Bruno. 

“He gived it me,” said Bruno. 

“But you shouldn’t ask for things! You know you 
shouldn’t!” 

“I didn’t ask,” said Bruno, taking a fresh mouthful: 
“he gived it me.” 

Sylvie considered this for a moment: then she saw her 
way out of it. “Well, then, ask him to give me some!” 

“You seem to enjoy that cake?” the Professor re¬ 
marked. 



658 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

“Doos that mean ‘munch’?” Bruno whispered to 
Sylvie. 

Sylvie nodded. ‘‘It means ‘to munch’ and ‘to like to 
munch’.” 

Bruno smiled at the Professor. ‘‘I doos enjoy it,” he 
said. 

The Other Professor caught the word. ‘‘And I hope 
you’re enjoying yourself, little Man?” he enquired. 

Bruno’s look of horror quite startled him. ‘‘No, indeed 
I aren’t!” he said. 

The Other Professor looked thoroughly puzzled. ‘‘Well, 
well!” he said. ‘‘Try some cowslip wine!” And he filled 
a glass and handed it to Bruno. ‘‘Drink this, my dear, and 
you’ll be quite another man!” 

‘‘Who shall I be?” said Bruno, pausing in the act of 
putting it to his lips. 

‘‘Don’t ask so many questions!” Sylvie interposed, 
anxious to save the poor old man from further bewilder¬ 
ment. ‘‘Suppose we get the Professor to tell us a story.” 

Bruno adopted the idea with enthusiasm. ‘‘Please do!” 
he cried eagerly. ‘‘Sumfin about tigers—and bumble-bees 
—and robin-redbreasts, 00 knows!” 

‘‘Why should you always have live things in stories?” 
said the Professor. ‘‘Why don’t you have events, or cir¬ 
cumstances?” 

‘‘Oh, please invent a story like that!” cried Bruno. 

The Professor began fluently enough. ‘‘Once a coin¬ 
cidence was taking a walk with a little accident, and they 
met an explanation—a very old explanation—so old that 
it was quite doubled up, and looked more like a conun¬ 
drum-” he broke off suddenly. 

"Please go on!” both children exclaimed. 

The Professor made a candid confession. ‘‘It’s a very 
difficult sort to invent, I find. Suppose Bruno tells one, 
first.” 

Bruno was only too happy to adopt the suggestion. 

“Once there were a Pig, and a Accordion, and two jars 
of Orange-marmalade-” 



THE PIG-TALE 659 

“The dramatis persona ,” murmured the Professor. 
“Well, what then?" 

“So, when the Pig played on the Accordion,” Bruno 
went on, “one of the Jars of Orange-marmalade didn’t 
like the tune, and the other Jar of Orange-marmalade did 
like the tune—I know I shall get confused among those 
Jars of Orange-marmalade, Sylvie!” he whispered 
anxiously. 

“I will now recite the other Introductory Verses,” said 
the Other Professor. 

Little Birds are choking 
Baronets with bun, 

T aught to fire a gun: 

Taught, I say, to splinter 

Salmon in the winter — 

Merely for the fun. 

Little Birds are hiding 
Crimes in carpet-bags. 

Blessed by happy stags: 

Blessed, I say, though beaten — 

Since our friends are eaten 
When the memory flags. 

Little Birds are tasting 
Gratitude and gold, 

Pale with sudden cold: 

Pale, I say, and wrinkled — 

When the bells have tinkled, 

And the Tale is told. 

“The next thing to be done”, the Professor cheerfully 
remarked to the Lord Chancellor, as soon as the applause, 
caused by the recital of the Pig-Tale, had come to an end, 
“is to drink the Emperor’s health, is it not?” 

“Undoubtedly!” the Lord Chancellor replied with 
much solemnity, as he rose to his feet to give the neces¬ 
sary directions for the ceremony. “Fill your glasses!” he 
thundered. All did so, instantly. “Drink the Emperor’s 



660 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

health!” A general gurgling resounded all through the 
Hall. “Three cheers for the Emperor!” The faintest poss¬ 
ible sound followed this announcement: and the Chan¬ 
cellor, with admirable presence of mind, instantly pro¬ 
claimed “A speech from the Emperor!” 

The Emperor had begun his speech almost before the 
words were uttered. “However unwilling to be Emperor 
—since you all wish me to be Emperor—you know how 
badly the late Warden managed things—with such 
enthusiasm as you have shown—he persecuted you—he 
taxed you too heavily—you know who is fittest man to 
be Emperor—my brother had no sense ” 

How long this curious speech might have lasted it is 
impossible to say, for just at this moment a hurricane 
shook the palace to its foundations, bursting open the 
windows, extinguishing some of the lamps, and filling the 
air with clouds of dust, which took strange shapes in the 
air, and seemed to form words. 

But the storm subsided as suddenly as it had risen— 
the casements swung into their places again: the dust 
vanished: all was as it had been a minute ago—with the 
exception of the Emperor and Empress, over whom had 
come a wondrous change. The vacant stare, the meaning¬ 
less smile, had passed away: all could see that these two 
strange beings had returned to their senses. 

The Emperor continued his speech as if there had been 
no interruption. “And we have behaved—my wife and I 
—like two arrant Knaves. We deserve no better name. 
When my brother went away, you lost the best Warden 
you ever had. And I’ve been doing my best, wretched 
hypocrite that I am, to cheat you into making me an 
Emperor. Me! One that has hardly got the wits to be a 
shoe-black!” 

The Lord Chancellor wrung his hands in despair. “He 
is mad, good people!” he was beginning. But both 
speeches stopped suddenly—and, in the dead silence that 
followed, a knocking was heard at the outer door. 

“What is it?” was the general cry. People began run- 



THE BEGGAR’S RETURN 


66i 

ning in and out. The excitement increased every moment. 
The Lord Chancellor, forgetting all the rules of Court- 
ceremony, ran full speed down the hall, and in a minute 
returned, pale and gasping for breath. 


Chapter XXIV 
The Beggar’s Return 

“Your Imperial Highnesses!’’ he began. “It’s the old 
Beggar again! Shall we set the dogs at him?’’ 

“Bring him here!” said the Emperor. 

The Chancellor could scarcely believe his ears. “Here, 
your Imperial Highness? Did I rightly understand-” 

“Bring him here!” the Emperor thundered once more. 
The Chancellor tottered down the hall—and in another 
minute the crowd divided, and the poor old Beggar was 
seen entering the Banqueting-Hall. 

He was indeed a pitiable object: the rags, that hung 
about him, were all splashed with mud: his white hair 
and his long beard were tossed about in wild disorder. 
Yet he walked upright, with a stately tread, as if used 
to command: and—strangest sight of all—Sylvie and 
Bruno came with him, clinging to his hands, and gazing 
at him with looks of silent love. 

Men looked eagerly to see how the Emperor would 
receive the bold intruder. Would he hurl him from the 
steps of the dais? But no. To their utter astonishment, 
the Emperor knelt as the beggar approached, and with 
bowed head murmured “Forgive us!” 

“Forgive us!” the Empress, kneeling at her husband’s 
side, meekly repeated. 

The Outcast smiled. “Rise up!” he said. “I forgive 
you!” And men saw with wonder that a change had 
passed over the old beggar, even as he spoke. What had 
seemed, but now, to be vile rags and splashes of mud. 



662 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

were seen to be in truth kingly trappings, broidered with 
gold, and sparkling with gems. All knew him now, and 
bent low before the Elder Brother, the true Warden. 

“Brother mine, and Sister mine!” the Warden began, 
in a clear voice that was heard all through that vast hall. 
"I come not to disturb you. Rule on, as Emperor, and 
rule wisely. For I am chosen King of Elfland. To-morrow 
I return there, taking nought from thence, save only— 

save only-” his voice trembled, and with a look of 

ineffable tenderness, he laid his hands in silence on the 
heads of the two little ones who clung around him. 

But he recovered himself in a moment, and beckoned 
to the Emperor to resume his place at the table. The 
company seated themselves again—room being found for 
the Elfin-King between his two children—and the Lord 
Chancellor rose once more, to propose the next toast. 

“The next toast—the hero of the day—why, he isn’t 
here!’’ he broke off in wild confusion. 

Good gracious! Everybody had forgotten Prince 
Uggug! 

“He was told of the Banquet, of course?” said the 
Emperor. 

“Undoubtedly!” replied the Chancellor. “That would 
be the duty of the Gold Stick in Waiting.” 

“Let the Gold Stick come forwards!” the Emperor 
gravely said. 

The Gold Stick came forwards. “I attended on His 
Imperial Fatness,” was the statement made by the trem¬ 
bling official. “I told him of the Lecture and the Ban¬ 
quet-.” 

“What followed!” said the Emperor: for the unhappy 
man seemed almost too frightened to go on. 

“His Imperial Fatness was graciously pleased to be 
sulky. His Imperial Fatness was graciously pleased to 
box my ears. His Imperial Fatness was graciously pleased 
to say ‘I don’t care!’ ” 

“ ‘Don’t-care’ came to a bad end,” Sylvie whispered to 
Bruno. “I’m not sure, but I believe he was hanged.” 



THE BEGGAR’S RETURN 663 

The Professor overheard her. “That result”, he blandly 
remarked, “was merely a case of mistaken identity.” 

Both children looked puzzled. 

“Permit me to explain. ‘Don’t-care’ and ‘Care’ were 
twin-brothers. ‘Care’, you know, killed the Cat. And they 
caught ‘Don't-care’ by mistake, and hanged him instead. 
And so ‘Care’ is alive still. But he’s very unhappy without 
his brother. That’s why they say ‘Begone, dull Care!’ ” 

“Thank you!” Sylvie said, heartily. “It’s very extreme¬ 
ly interesting. Why, it seems to explain everything !” 

“Well, not quite everything ,” the Professor modestly 
rejoined. "There are two or three scientific difficulties—” 

“What was your general impression as to His Imperial 
Fatness?” the Emperor asked the Gold Stick. 

“My impression was that His Imperial Fatness was 
getting more-” 

"Mor Qwhatl” 

All listened breathlessly for the next word. 

"More prickly!” 

“He must be sent for at once l” the Emperor exclaimed. 
And the Gold Stick went off like a shot. The Elfin-King 
sadly shook his head. “No use, no use!” he murmured to 
himself. “Loveless, loveless!” 

Pale, trembling, speechless, the Gold Stick came slowly 
back again. 

"Well?” said the Emperor. “Why does not the Prince 
appear?” 

“One can easily guess,” said the Professor. "His Im¬ 
perial Fatness is, without doubt, a little preoccupied.” 

Bruno turned a look of solemn enquiry on his old 
friend. “What do that word mean?” 1 

But the Professor took no notice of the question. He 
was eagerly listening to the Gold Stick’s reply. 

“Please your Highness! His Imperial Fatness is-” 

Not a word more could he utter. 

The Empress rose in an agony of alarm. “Let us go to 
him!” she cried. And there was a general rush for the 
door. 



664 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

Bruno slipped off his chair in a moment. “May we go 
too?” he eagerly asked. But the King did not hear the 
question, as the Professor was speaking to him. “ Preoccu¬ 
pied , your Majesty!” he was saying. “That is what he is, 
no doubt!” 

"May we go and see him?” Bruno repeated. The King 
nodded assent, and the children ran off. In a minute or 
two they returned, slowly and gravely. “Well?” said the 
King. “What’s the matter with the Prince?” 

“He’s—what you said,” Bruno replied looking at the 
Professor. "That hard word.” And he looked to Sylvie 
for assistance. 

“Porcupine,” said Sylvie. 

“No, no!” the Professor corrected her. “ ‘Pre-occupied,’ 
you mean.” 

“No, it’s porcupine,” persisted Sylvie. "Not that other 
word at all. And please will you come? The house is all 
in an uproar.” (“And oo’d better bring an uproar-glass 
wiz oo!” added Bruno.) 

We got up in great haste, and followed the children 
upstairs. No one took the least notice of me, but I wasn’t 
at all surprised at this, as I had long realized that I was 
quite invisible to them all—even to Sylvie and Bruno. 

All along the gallery, that led to the Prince’s apart¬ 
ment, an excited crowd was surging to and fro, and the 
Babel of voices was deafening: against the door of the 
room three strong men were leaning, vainly trying to shut 
it—for some great animal inside was constantly bursting 
it half open, and we had a glimpse, before the men could 
push it back again, of the head of a furious wild beast, 
with great fiery eyes and gnashing teeth. Its voice was a 
sort of mixture—there was the roaring of a lion, and the 
bellowing of a bull, and now and then a scream like a 
gigantic parrot. “There is no judging by the voice!” the 
Professor cried in great excitement. “What is it?” he 
shouted to the men at the door. And a general chorus 
of voices answered him “Porcupine! Prince Uggug has 
turned into a Porcupine!” 



THE BEGGAR’S RETURN 


665 

“A new Specimen!” exclaimed the delighted Professor. 
“Pray let me go in. It should be labeled at once!” 

But the strong men only pushed him back. “Label it, 
indeed! Do you want to be eaten up?” they cried. 

“Never mind about Specimens, Professor!” said the 
Emperor, pushing his way through the crowd. “Tell us 
how to keep him safe!” 

“A large cage!” the Professor promptly replied. “Bring 
a large cage,” he said to the people generally, “with strong 
bars of steel, and a portcullis made to go up and down 
like a mouse-trap! Does anyone happen to have such a 
thing about him?” 

It didn’t sound a likely sort of thing for anyone to have 
about him; however, they brought him one directly: 
curiously enough, there happened to be one standing in 
the gallery. 

"Put it facing the opening of the door, and draw up 
the portcullis!” This was done in a moment. 

“Blankets now!” cried the Professor. “This is a most 
interesting Experiment!” 

There happened to be a pile of blankets close by: and 
the Professor had hardly said the word, when they were 
all unfolded and held up like curtains all around. The 
Professor rapidly arranged them in two rows, so as to 
make a dark passage, leading straight from the door to 
the mouth of the cage. 

“Now fling the door open!” This did not need to be 
done: the three men had only to leap out of the way, and 
the fearful monster flung the door open for itself, and, 
with a yell like the whistle of a steam-engine, rushed into 
the cage. 

“Down with the portcullis!” No sooner said than done: 
and all breathed freely once more, on seeing the Porcu¬ 
pine safely caged. 

The Professor rubbed his hands in childish delight. 
“The Experiment has succeeded!” he proclaimed. “All 
that is needed now is to feed it three times a day, on 
chopped carrots and-” 



666 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

"Never mind about its food, just now!” the Emperor 
interrupted. “Let us return to the Banquet. Brother, will 
you lead the way?” And the old man, attended by his 
children, headed the procession down stairs. "See the fate 
of a loveless life!” he said to Bruno, as they returned to 
their places. To which Bruno made reply, "I always loved 
Sylvie, so I’ll never get prickly like that!” 

"He is prickly, certainly,” said the Professor, who had 
caught the last words, "but we must remember that, how¬ 
ever porcupiny, he is royal still! After this feast is over, 
I’m going to take a little present to Prince Uggug—just 
to soothe him, you know: it isn’t pleasant living in a 
cage.” 

"What’ll you give him for a birthday-present?” Bruno 
enquired. 

"A small saucer of chopped carrots,” replied the Pro¬ 
fessor. "In giving birthday-presents, my motto is—cheap¬ 
ness! I should think I save forty pounds a year by giving 
—oh, what a twinge of pain!” 

"What is it?” said Sylvie anxiously. 

"My old enemy!” groaned the Professor. "Lumbago— 
rheumatism—that sort of thing. I think I’ll go and lie 
down a bit.” And he hobbled out of the Saloon, watched 
by the pitying eyes of the two children. 

"He’ll be better soon!” the Elfin-King said cheerily. 
"Brother!” turning to the Emperor, "I have some busi¬ 
ness to arrange with you to-night. The Empress will take 
care of the children.” And the two Brothers went away 
together, arm-in-arm. 

The Empress found the children rather sad company. 
They could talk of nothing but “the dear Professor”, and 
"what a pity he’s so ill”, till at last she made the welcome 
proposal "Let’s go and see him!” 

The children eagerly grasped the hands she offered 
them: and we went off to the Professor’s study, and found 
him lying on the sofa, covered up with blankets, and 
reading a little manuscript-book. “Notes on Vol. Three!” 
he murmured, looking up at us. And there, on a table 



THE BEGGAR’S RETURN 667 

near him, lay the book he was seeking when first I saw 
him. 

“And how are you now, Professor?” the Empress asked, 
beading over the invalid. 

The Professor looked up, and smiled feebly. “As de¬ 
voted to your Imperial Highness as ever!” he said in a 
weak voice. “All of me, that is not Lumbago, is Loyalty!” 

“A sweet sentiment!” the Empress exclaimed with 
tears in her eyes. “You seldom hear anything so beautiful 
as that—even in a Valentine!” 

“We must take you to stay at the seaside,” Sylvie said, 
tenderly. “It’ll do you ever so much good! And the Sea’s 
so grand!” 

“But a Mountain’s grander!” said Bruno. 

“What is there grand about the Sea?” said the Pro¬ 
fessor. “Why, you could put it all into a teacup!” 

“Some of it,” Sylvie corrected him. 

“Well, you’d only want a certain number of teacups to 
hold it all. And then where’s the grandeur? Then as to a 
Mountain—why, you could carry it all away in a wheel¬ 
barrow, in a certain number of years!” 

“It wouldn’t look grand—the bits of it in the wheel¬ 
barrow,” Sylvie candidly admitted. 

“But when oo put it together again-” Bruno began. 

"When you’re older,” said the Professor, "you’ll know 
that you ca’n’t put Mountains together again so easily! 

• One lives and one learns, you know!” 

“But it needn’t be the same one, need it?” said Bruno. 
“Wo’n’t it do, if 1 live, and if Sylvie learns?” 

“I ca’n’t learn without living!” said Sylvie. 

“But I can live without learning!” Bruno retorted. “Oo 
just try me!” 

“What I meant, was—” the Professor began, looking 
much puzzled, “—was—that you don’t know everything, 
you know.” 

“But I do know everything I know!” persisted the little 
fellow. “I know ever so many things! Everything, ’cept 
the things I don’t know. And Sylvie knows all the rest.” 



668 


SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 


The Professor sighed, and gave it up. “Do you know 
what a Boojum is?" 

“J know!” cried Bruno. “It’s the thing what wrenches 
people out of their boots!” 

“He means ‘bootj'ack’,” Sylvie explained in a whisper. 

“You ca’n’t wrench people out of boots,” the Professor 
mildly observed. 

Bruno laughed saucily. “Oo can, though! Unless they’re 
welly tight in.” 

“Once upon a time there was a Boojum-” the Pro¬ 

fessor began, but stopped suddenly. “I forget the rest of 
the Fable,” he said. “And there was a lesson to be learned 
from it. I’m afraid I forget that too.” 

“I'll tell oo a Fable!” Bruno began in a great hurry. 
“Once there were a Locust, and a Magpie, and a Engine- 
driver. And the Lesson is, to learn to get up early--” 

“It isn't a bit interesting!” Sylvie said contemptuously. 
“You shouldn’t put the Lesson so soon.” 

“When did you invent that Fable?” said the Professor. 
“Last week?” 

“No!” said Bruno. “A deal shorter ago than that, Guess 
again!” 

“I ca’n’t guess,” said the Professor. “How long ago?” 

“Why, it isn’t invented yet!” Bruno exclaimed tri¬ 
umphantly. “But I have invented a lovely one! Shall I 
say it?” 

“If you’ve finished inventing it,” said Sylvie. “And let 
the Lesson be ‘to try again’!” 

“No,” said Bruno with great decision. "The Lesson are 
‘not to try again’!” “Once there were a lovely china man, 
what stood on the chimbley-piece. And he stood, and he 
stood. And one day he tumbleded off, and he didn’t hurt 
his self one bit. Only he would try again. And the next 
time he tumbleded off, he hurted his self welly much, and 
breaked off ever so much varnish.” 

“But how did he come back on the chimney-piece after 
his first tumble?” said the Empress. (It was the first 
sensible question she had asked in all her life.) 



669 


THE BEGGAR'S RETURN 

“/ put him there!” cried Bruno. 

“Then I’m afraid you know something about his 
tumbling,” said the Professor. “Perhaps you pushed 
him?” 

To which Bruno replied, very seriously, “Didn’t pushed 
him much —he were a lovely china man,” he added hastily, 
evidently very anxious to change the subject. 

“Come, my children!” said the Elfin-King, who had 
just entered the room. “We must have a little chat to¬ 
gether, before you go to bed.” And he was leading them 
away, but at the door they let go his hands, and ran back 
again to wish the Professor good night. 

“Good night, Profesor, good night!” And Bruno 
solemnly shook hands with the old man, who gazed at him 
with a loving smile, while Sylvie bent down to press her 
sweet lips upon his forehead. 

“Good night, little ones!” said the Professor. “You may 
leave me now—to ruminate. I’m as jolly as the day is 
long, except when it’s necessary to ruminate on some very 
difficult subject. All of me,” he murmured sleepily as we 
left the room, “all of me, that isn’t Bonhommie, is 
Rumination!” 

“What did he say, Bruno?” Sylvie enquired, as soon as 
we were safely out of hearing. 

“I think he said ‘All of me that isn’t Bone-disease is 
Rheumatism.’ Whatever are that knocking, Sylvie?” 

Sylvie stopped, and listened anxiously. It sounded like 
some one kicking at a door, “I hope it isn’t that Porcupine 
breaking loose!” she exclaimed. 

“Let’s go on!” Bruno said hastily. “There’s nuffin to 
wait for, oo know!” 



Chapter XXV 


Life Out of Death 

The sound of kicking, or knocking, grew louder every 
moment: and at last a door opened somewhere near us. 
“Did you say ‘come in!’ Sir?” my landlady asked timidly. 

“Oh yes, come in!” I replied. “What’s the matter?” 

“A note has just been left for you, Sir, by the baker’s 
boy. He said he was passing the Hall, and they asked him 
to come round and leave it here.” 

The note contained five words only. “Please come at 
once. Muriel.” 

A sudden terror seemed to chill my very heart. “The 
Earl is ill!” I said to myself. “Dying, perhaps!” And I 
hastily prepared to leave the house. 

“No bad news, Sir, I hope?” my landlady said, as she 
saw me out. “The boy said as some one had arrived unex¬ 
pectedly-” 

“I hope that is it!” I said. But my feelings were those of 
fear rather than of hope: though, on entering the house, I 
was somehat reassured by finding luggage lying in the 
entrance, bearing the initials “E. L.” 

“It’s only Eric Lindon after all!” I thought, half re¬ 
lieved and half annoyed. "Surely she need not have sent 
for me for thatl” 

Lady Muriel met me in the passage. Her eyes were 
gleaming—but it was the excitement of joy, rather than 
of grief. “I have a surprise for you!” she whispered. 

"You mean that Eric Lindon is here?” I said, vainly 
trying to disguise the involuntary bitterness of my tone. 
“ ‘The funeral baked meats did coldly furnish forth the 
marriage-tables,’ ” I could not help repeating to myself. 
How cruelly I was misjudging her! 

“No, no!” she eagerly replied. “At least—Eric is here. 
But-” her voice quivered, “but there is anotherl” 

No need for further question. I eagerly followed her in. 
There on the bed, he lay—pale and worn—the mere 

670 



LIFE OUT OF DEATH 67I 

shadow of his old self—my old friend come back again 
from the dead! 

“Arthur!” I exclaimed. I could not say another word. 

“Yes, back again, old boy!” he murmured, smiling as I 
grasped his hand. “He ", indicating Eric, who stood near, 
“saved my life —He brought me back. Next to God, we 
must thank him, Muriel, my wife!” 

Silently I shook hands with Eric, and with the Earl: 
and with one consent we moved into the shaded side of 
the room, where we could talk without disturbing the 
invalid, who lay, silent and happy, holding his wife’s hand 
in his, and watching her with eyes that shone with the 
deep steady light of Love. 

"He has been delirious till to-day,” Eric explained in a 
low voice: “and even to-day he has been wandering more 
than once. But the sight of her has been new life to him.” 
And then he went on to tell us, in would-be careless tones 
—I knew how he hated any display of feeling—how he 
had insisted on going back to the plague-stricken town, to 
bring away a man whom the doctor had abandoned as 
dying, but who might, he fancied, recover if brought to 
the hospital: how he had seen nothing in the wasted 
features to remind him of Arthur, and only recognized 
him when he visited the hospital a month after: how the 
doctor had forbidden him to announce the discovery, 
saying that any shock to the over-taxed brain might kill 
him at once: how he had stayed on at the hospital, and 
nursed the sick man by night and day—all this with the 
studied indifference of one who is relating the common¬ 
place acts of some chance acquaintance! 

“And this was his rivall ” I thought. "The man who had 
won from him the heart of the woman he loved!” 

“The sun is setting,” said Lady Muriel, rising and lead¬ 
ing the way to the open window. “Just look at the western 
sky! What lovely crimson tints! We shall have a glorious 

day to-morrow-” We had followed her across the 

room, and were standing in a little group, talking in low 
tones in the gathering gloom, when we were startled by 



672 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

the voice of the sick man, murmuring words too indistinct 
for the ear to catch. 

“He is wandering again,” Lady Muriel whispered, and 
returned to the bedside. We drew a little nearer also: but 
no, this had none of the incoherence of delirium. “What 
reward shall I give unto the Lord ”, the tremulous lips were 
saying, “for all the benefits that He hath done unto me? I 

will receive the cup of salvation, and call—and call -” 

but here the poor weakened memory failed, and the feeble 
voice died into silence. 

His wife knelt down at the bedside, raised one of his 
arms, and drew it across her own, fondly kissing the thin 
white hand that lay so listlessly in her loving grasp. It 
seemed to me a good opportunity for stealing away with¬ 
out making her go through any form of parting: so, 
nodding to the Earl and Eric, I silently left the room. 
Eric followed me dotfm the stairs, and out into the night. 

“Is it Life or Death?” I asked him, as soon as we were far 
enough from the house for me to speak in ordinary tones. 

“It is Life !” he replied with eager emphasis. “The 
doctors are quite agreed as to that. All he needs now, they 
say, is rest, and perfect quiet, and good nursing. He’s 
quite sure to get rest and quiet, here: and, as for the 

nursing, why, I think it’s just possible -” (he tried hard 

to make his trembling voice assume a playful tone) “he 
may even get fairly well nursed, in his present quarters!” 

“I’m sure of it!” I said. “Thank you so much for com¬ 
ing out to tell me!” And, thinking he had now said all he 
had come to say, I held out my hand to bid him good 
night. He grasped it warmly, and added, turning his face 
away as he spoke, “By the way, there is one other thing 
I wanted to say, I thought you’d like to know that—that 
I’m not—not in the mind I was in when last we met. It 
isn't—that I can accept Christian belief—at least, not 
yet. But all this came about so strangely. And she had 
prayed, you know. And I had prayed. And—and” his 
voice broke, and I could only just catch the concluding 
words, " there is a God that answers prayer! I know it for 



LIFE OUT OF DEATH 673 

certain now.” He wrung my hand once more, and left me 
suddenly. Never before had I seen him so deeply moved. 

So, in the gathering twilight, I paced slowly home¬ 
wards, in a tumultuous whirl of happy thoughts: my 
heart seemed full, and running over, with joy and thank¬ 
fulness: all that I had so fervently longed for, and prayed 
for, seemed now to have come to pass. And, though I 
reproached myself, bitterly, for the unworthy suspicion I 
had for one moment harboured against the true-hearted 
Lady Muriel, I took comfort in knowing it had been but 
a passing thought. 

Not Bruno himself could have mounted the stairs with 
so buoyant a step, as I felt my way up in the dark, not 
pausing to strike a light in the entry, as I knew I had left 
the lamp burning in my sitting-room. 

But it was no common lamplight into which I now 
stepped, with a strange, new, dreamy sensation of some 
subtle witchery that had come over the place. Light, 
richer and more golden than any lamp could give, flooded 
the room, streaming in from a window I had somehow 
never noticed before, and lighting up a group of three sha¬ 
dowy figures, that grew momently more distinct—a grave 
old man in royal robes, leaning back in an easy chair, 
and two children, a girl and a boy, standing at his side. 

"Have you the Jewel still, my child?” the old man was 
saying. 

“Oh, yes\” Sylvie exclaimed with unusual eagerness. 

"Do you think I'd ever lose it or forget it?” She undid 
the ribbon round her neck, as she spoke, and laid the 
Jewel in her father’s hand. 

Bruno looked at it admiringly. "What a lovely bright¬ 
ness!” he said. "It’s just like a little red star! May I take 
it in my hand?” 

Sylvie nodded: and Bruno carried it off to the window, 
and held it aloft against the sky, whose deepening blue 
was already spangled with stars. Soon he came running 
back in some excitement. "Sylvie! Look here!” he cried. 
"I can see right through it when I hold it up to the sky. 



674 SYLVIE AND BRUNO CONCLUDED 

And it isn’t red a bit: it’s, oh such a lovely blue! And the 
words are all different! Do look at it!” 

Sylvie was quite excited, too, by this time; and the two 
children eagerly held up the Jewel to the light, and spelled 
out the legend between them, ‘‘all will love sylvie.” 

‘‘Why, this is the other Jewel!” cried Bruno. ‘‘Don’t 
you remember, Sylvie? The one you didn’t choose!” 

Sylvie took it from him, with a puzzled look, and held 
it, now up to the light, now down. ‘‘It’s blue, one way,” 
she said softly to herself, ‘‘and it’s red the other way! 
Why, I thought there were two of them—Father!” she 
suddenly exclaimed, laying the Jewel once more in his 
hand, ‘‘I do believe it was the same Jewel all the time!” 

‘‘Then you choosed it from itself,” Bruno thoughtfully 
remarked. “Father, could Sylvie choose a thing from 
itself?” 

“Yes, my own one,” the old man replied to Sylvie, not 
noticing Bruno’s embarrassing question, “it was the same 
Jewel—but you chose quite right.” And he fastened the 
ribbon round her neck again. 

“SYLVIE WILL LOVE ALL—ALL WILL LOVE SYLVIE.” 
Bruno murmured, raising himself on tiptoe to kiss the 
“little red star”. “And, when you look at it, it’s red and 
fierce like the sun—and, when you look through it, it’s 
gentle and blue like the sky!” 

“God's own sky,” Sylvie said, dreamily. 

“God’s own sky,” the little fellow repeated, as they 
stood, lovingly clinging together, and looking out into 
the night. “But oh, Sylvie, what makes the sky such a 
darling blue?” 

Sylvie’s sweet lips shaped themselves to reply, but her 
voice sounded faint and very far away. The vision was 
fast slipping from my eager gaze: but it seemed to me, in 
that last bewildering moment, that not Sylvie but an 
angel was looking out through those trustful brown eyes, 
and that not Sylvie’s but an angel’s voice was whispering 

“it is love.” 






PREFACE TO 

THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 

If —and the thing is wildly possible—the charge of 
writing nonsense were ever brought against the author of 
this brief but instructive poem, it would be based, I feel 
convinced, on the line (in p. 684) 

"Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes:’’ 

In view of this painful possibility, I will not (as I might) 
appeal indignantly to my other writings as a proof that I 
am incapable of such a deed: I will not (as I might) point 
to the strong moral purpose of this poem itself, to the 
arithmetical principles so cautiously inculcated in it, or to 
its noble teachings in Natural History—I will take the 
more prosaic course of simply explaining how it hap¬ 
pened. 

The Bellman, who was almost morbidly sensitive about 
appearances, used to have the bowsprit unshipped once 
or twice a week to be revamished; and it more than once 
happened, when the time came for replacing it, that no 
one on board could remember which end of the ship it 
belonged to. They knew it was not of the slightest use to 
appeal to the Bellman about it—he would only refer to 
his Naval Code, and read out in pathetic tones Admiralty 
Instructions which none of them had ever been able to 
understand—so it generally ended in its being fastened 
on, anyhow, across the rudder. The helmsman 1 used to 
stand by with tears in his eyes: he knew it was all wrong, 
but alas! Rule 42 of the Code, “No one shall speak to the 

1 This office was usually undertaken by the Boots, who found in 
it a refuge from the Baker’s constant complaints about the insuffi¬ 
cient blacking of his three pairs of boots. 

677 



VERSE 


678 

Man at the Helm,” had been completed by the Bellman 
himself with the words “and the Man at the Helm shall 
speak to no one” So remonstrance was impossible, and no 
steering could be done till the next varnishing day. Dur¬ 
ing these bewildering intervals the ship usually sailed 
backwards. 

As this poem is to some extent connected with the lay 
of the Jabberwock, let me take this opportunity of 
answering a question that has often been asked me, how 
to pronounce “slithy toves”. The “i” in “slithy” is long, 
as in “writhe”; and “toves” is pronounced so as to rhyme 
with “groves”. Again, the first "o” in “borogoves” is pro¬ 
nounced like the “o” in “borrow”. I have heard people 
try to give it the sound of the “o” in “worry”. Such is 
Human Perversity. 

This also seems a fitting occasion to notice the other 
hard words in that poem. Humpty-Dumpty’s theory, of 
two meanings packed into one word like a portmanteau, 
seems to me the right explanation for all. 

For instance, take the two words “fuming” and “furi¬ 
ous”. Make up your mind that you will say both words, 
but leave it unsettled which you will say first. Now open 
your mouth and speak. If your thoughts incline ever so 
little towards “fuming”, you will say “fuming-furious”; 
if they turn, by even a hair’s breadth, towards “furious”, 
you will say “furious-fuming”; but if you have that rarest 
of gifts, a perfectly balanced mind, you will say “frum- 
ious”. 

Supposing that, when Pistol uttered the well-known 
words— 


“Under which king, Bezonian? Speak or die!” 

Justice Shallow had felt certain that it was either Wil¬ 
liam or Richard, but had not been able to settle which, so 
that he could not possibly say either name before the 
other, can it be doubted that, rather than die, he would 
have gasped out “Rilchiam!” 



INSCRIBED TO A DEAR CHILD! 

IN MEMORY OF GOLDEN SUMMER HOURS 


AND WHISPERS OF A SUMMER SEA 

Girt with a boyish garb for boyish task, 

Eager she wields her spade: yet loves as well 

Rest on a friendly knee, intent to ask 
The tale he loves to tell. 

Rude spirits of the seething outer strife, 

Unmeet to read her pure and simple spright, 

Deem, if you list, such hours a waste of life, 

Empty of all delight! 

Chat on, sweet Maid, and rescue from annoy 
Hearts that by wiser talk are unbeguiled. 

Ah, happy he who owns that tenderest joy, 

The heart-love of a child! 

Away, fond thoughts, and vex my soul no more! 
Work claims my wakeful nights, my busy days — 

Albeit bright memories of that sunlit shore 
Yet haunt my dreaming gaze! 


679 



THE HUNTING OF THE 
SNARK 


Fit the First 
The Landing 

"Just the place for a Snark!” the Bellman cried, 

As he landed his crew with care; 

Supporting each man on the top of the tide 
By a finger entwined in his hair. 

"Just the place for a Snark! I have said it twice: 

That alone should encourage the crew. 

Just the place for a Snark! I have said it thrice: 

What I tell you three times is true.” 

The crew was complete: it included a Boots— 

A maker of Bonnets and Hoods— 

A Barrister, brought to arrange their disputes— 

And a Broker, to value their goods. 

A Billiard-marker, whose skill was immense, 

Might perhaps have won more than his share— 

But a Banker, engaged at enormous expense, 

Had the whole of their cash in his care. 

There was also a Beaver, that paced on the deck, 

Or would sit making lace in the bow: 

And had often (the Bellman said) saved them from wreck 
Though none of the sailors knew how. 

There was one who was famed for the number of things 
He forgot when he entered the ship: 

His umbrella, his watch, all his jewels and rings, 

And the clothes he had bought for the trip. 

680 



THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 68l 

He had forty-two boxes, all carefully packed, 

With his name painted clearly on each: 

But, since he omitted to mention the fact, 

They were all left behind on the beach. 

The loss of his clothes hardly mattered, because 
He had seven coats on when he came, 

With three pair of boots—but the worst of it was, 

He had wholly forgotten his name. 

He would answer to “Hi!” or to any loud cry, 

Such as “Fry me!” or “Fritter my wig!” 

To “What-you-may-call-um!” or “What-was-his-name!” 
But especially “Thing-um-a-jig!” 

While, for those who preferred a more forcible word, 

He had different names from these: 

His intimate friends called him “Candle-ends”, 

And his enemies “Toasted-cheese”. 

“His form is ungainly—his intellect small—’' 

(So the Bellman would often remark)— 

"But his courage is perfect! And that, after all, 

Is the thing that one needs with a Snark.” 

He would joke with hyaenas, returning their stare 
With an impudent wag of the head: 

And he once went a walk, paw-in-paw, with a bear, 

"Just to keep up its spirits,” he said. 

He came as a Baker: but owned, when too late— 

And it drove the poor Bellman half-mad— 

He could only bake Bridecake—for which, I may state, 
No materials were to be had. 

The last of the crew needs especial remark, 

Though he looked an incredible dunce: 

He had just one idea—but, that one being “Snark”, 

The good Bellman engaged him at once. 



682 


VERSE 


He came as a Butcher: but gravely declared, 

When the ship had been sailing a week, 

He could only kill Beavers. The Bellman looked scared, 
And was almost too frightened to speak: 

But at length he explained, in a tremulous tone, 

There was only one Beaver on board; 

And that was a tame one he had of his own. 

Whose death would be deeply deplored. 

The Beaver, who happened to hear the remark, 
Protested, with tears in its eyes, 

That not even the rapture of hunting the Snark 
Could atone for that dismal surprise! 

It strongly advised that the Butcher should be 
Conveyed in a separate ship: 

But the Bellman declared that would never agree 
With the plans he had made for the trip: 

Navigation was always a difficult art, 

Though with only one ship and one bell: 

And he feared he must really decline, for his part, 
Undertaking another as well. 

The Beaver’s best course was, no doubt, to procure 
A second-hand dagger-proof coat— 

So the Baker advised it—and next, to insure 
Its life in some Office of note: 

This the Baker suggested, and offered for hire 
(On moderate terms), or for sale, 

Two excellent Policies, one Against Fire 
And one Against Damage From Hail. 

Yet still, ever after that sorrowful day, 

Whenever the Butcher was by, 

The Beaver kept looking the opposite way. 

And appeared unaccountably shy. 



THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 


683 


Fit the Second 
The Bellman’s Speech 

The Bellman himself they all praised to the skies— 

Such a carriage, such ease and such grace! 

Such solemnity, too! One could see he was wise, 

The moment one looked in his face! 

He had bought a large map representing the sea, 

Without the least vestige of land: 

And the crew were much pleased when they found it to be 
A map they could all understand. 

“What's the good of Mercator’s North Poles and Equa¬ 
tors, 

Tropics, Zones, and Meridian Lines?” 

So the Bellman would cry: and the crew would reply 
“They are merely conventional signs! 

“Other maps are such shapes, with their islands and 
capes! 

But we’ve got our, brave Captain to thank” 

(So the crew would protest) “that he’s bought us the 
best— 

A perfect and absolute blank!” 

This was charming, no doubt: but they shortly found out 
That the Captain they trusted so well 
Had only one notion for crossing the ocean, 

And that was to tingle his bell. 

He was thoughtful and grave—but the orders he gave 
Were enough to bewilder a crew. 

When he cried "Steer to starboard, but keep her head 
larboard!” 

What on earth was the helmsman to do? 



VERSE 


684 

Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes: 

A thing, as the Bellman remarked, 

That frequently happens in tropical climes, 

When a vessel is, so to speak, “snarked”. 

But the principal failing occurred in the sailing, 

And the Bellman, perplexed and distressed, 

Said he had hoped, at least, when the wind blew due East, 
That the ship would not travel due West! 

But the danger was past—they had landed at last, 

With their boxes, portmanteaus, and bags: 

Yet at first sight the crew were not pleased with the view 
Which consisted of chasms and crags. 

The Bellman perceived that their spirits were low, 

And repeated in musical tone 
Some jokes he had kept for a season of woe— 

But the crew would do nothing but groan. 

He served out some grog with a liberal hand, 

And bade them sit down on the beach: 

And they could not but own that their Captain looked 
grand. 

As he stood and delivered his speech. 

“Friends, Romans, and countrymen, lend me your ears!” 

(They were all of them fond of quotations: 

So they drank to his health, and they gave him three 
cheers, 

While he served out additional rations). 

“We have sailed many months, we have sailed many 
weeks, 

(Four weeks to the month you may mark), 

But never as yet (’tis your Captain who speaks) 

Have we caught the least glimpse of a Snark! 



THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 685 

“We have sailed many weeks, we have sailed many days, 
(Seven days to the week I allow), 

But a Snark, on the which we might lovingly gaze, 

We have never beheld till now! 

“Come, listen, my men, while I tell you again 
The five unmistakable marks 

By which you may know, wheresoever you go. 

The warranted genuine Snarks. 

“Let us take them in order. The first is the taste, 

Which is meagre and hollow, but crisp: 

Like a coat that is rather too tight in the waist, 

With a flavour of Will-o’-the-Wisp. 

“Its habit of getting up late you’ll agree 
That it carries too far, when I say 

That it frequently breakfasts at five-o’clock tea. 

And dines on the following day. 

“The third is its slowness in taking a jest. 

Should you happen to venture on one, 

It will sigh like a thing that is deeply distressed: 

And it always looks grave at a pun. 

“The fourth is its fondness for bathing-machines, 

Which it constantly carries about, 

And believes that they add to the beauty of scenes— 

A sentiment open to doubt. 

“The fifth is ambition. It next will be right 
To describe each particular batch: 

Distinguishing those that have feathers, and bite. 

From those that have whiskers, and scratch. 

“For, although common Snarks do no manner of harm, 
Yet I feel it my duty to say 

Some are Boojums-” The Bellman broke off in alarm. 

For the Baker had fainted away. 



686 


VERSE 


Fit the Third 
The Baker’s Tale 

They roused him with muffins—they roused him with 
ice— 

They roused him with mustard and cress— 

They roused him with jam and judicious advice— 

They set him conundrums to guess. 

When at length he sat up and was able to speak, 

His sad story he offered to tell; 

And the Bellman cried "Silence! Not even a shriek!” 

And excitedly tingled his bell. 

There was silence supreme! Not a shriek, not a scream, 
Scarcely even a howl or a groan. 

As the man they called “Ho!” told his story of woe 
In an antediluvian tone. 

"My father and mother were honest, though poor-” 

"Skip all that!” cried the Bellman in haste. 

"If it once becomes dark, there’s no chance of a Snark— 
We have hardly a minute to waste!” 

"I skip forty years,” said the Baker in tears, 

"And proceed without further remark 
To the day when you took me aboard of your ship 
To help you in hunting the Snark. 

"A dear uncle of mine (after whom I was named) 

Remarked, when I bade him farewell-” 

"Oh, skip your dear uncle!” the Bellman exclaimed, 

As he angrily tingled his bell. 

"He remarked to me then,” said that mildest of men, 

" ‘If your Snark be a Snark, that is right: 



THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 68j 

Fetch it home by all means—you may serve it with greens 
And it's handy for striking a light. 

“ ‘You may seek it with thimbles—and seek it with care— 
You may hunt it with forks and hope; 

You may threaten its life with a railway-share; 

You may charm it with smiles and soap-’ ” 

("That’s exactly the method,” the Bellman bold 
In a hasty parenthesis cried, 

"That’s exactly the way I have always been told 
That the capture of Snarks should be tried!”) 

" ‘But oh, beamish nephew, beware of the day, 

If your Snark be a Boojum! For then 

You will softly and suddenly vanish away, 

And never be met with again!’ 

"It is this, it is this that oppresses my soul, 

When I think of my uncle’s last words: 

And my heart is like nothing so much as a bowl 
Brimming over with quivering curds! 

"It is this, it is this-” "We have had that before!’’ 

The Bellman indignantly said. 

And the Baker replied “Let me say it once more. 

It is this, it is this that I dread! 

"I engage with the Snark—every night after dark— 

In a dreamy delirious fight: 

I serve it with greens in those shadowy scenes, 

And I use it for striking a light: 

"But if ever I meet with a Boojum, that day, 

In a moment (of this I am sure), 

I shall softly and suddenly vanish away— 

And the notion I cannot endure!” 



688 


VERSE 


Fit the Fourth 
The Hunting 

The Bellman looked uffish, and wrinkled his brow. 

“If only you'd spoken before! 

It’s excessively awkward to mention it now, 

With the Snark, so to speak, at the door! 

“We should all of us grieve, as you well may believe, 

If you never were met with again— 

But surely, my man, when the voyage began, 

You might have suggested it then? 

“It’s excessively awkward to mention it now— 

As I think I’ve already remarked.” 

And the man they called “Hi!” replied, with a sigh, 

“I informed you the day we embarked. 

“You may charge me with murder—or want of sense— 
(We are all of us weak at times): 

But the slightest approach to a false pretence 
Was never among my crimes! 

“I said it in Hebrew—I said it in Dutch— 

I said it in German and Greek: 

But I wholly forgot (and it vexes me much) 

That English is what you speak!” 

“ 'Tis a pitiful tale,” said the Bellman, whose face 
Had grown longer at every word: 

“But, now that you've stated the whole of your case, 
More debate would be simply absurd. 

“The rest of my speech” (he exclaimed to his men) 
“You shall hear when I've leisure to speak it. 

But the Snark is at hand, let me tell you again! 

'Tis your glorious duty to seek it! 



THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 


689 


“To seek it with thimbles, to seek it with care; 

To pursue it with forks and hope; 

To threaten its life with a railway-share; 

To charm it with smiles and soap! 

“For the Snark’s a peculiar creature, that wo'n’t 
Be caught in a commonplace way. 

Do all that you know, and try all that you don’t: 

Not a chance must be wasted to-day! 

“For England expects—I forbear to proceed: 

'Tis a maxim tremendous, but trite: 

And you’d best be unpacking the things that you need 
To rig yourselves out for the fight.” 

Then the Banker endorsed a blank cheque (which he 
crossed), 

And changed his loose silver for notes: 

The Baker with care combed his whiskers and hair. 

And shook the dust out of his coats: 

The Boots and the Broker were sharpening a spade— 
Each working the grindstone in turn: 

But the Beaver went on making lace, and displayed 
No interest in the concern: 

Though the Barrister tried to appeal to its pride. 

And vainly proceeded to cite 
A number of cases, in which making laces 
Had been proved an infringement of right. 

The maker of Bonnets ferociously planned 
A novel arrangement of bows: 

While the Billiard-marker with quivering hand 
Was chalking the tip of his nose. 

But the Butcher turned nervous, and dressed himself fine, 
With yellow kid gloves and a ruff— 



VERSE 


69O 

Said he felt it exactly like going to dine, 

Which the Bellman declared was all “stuff”. 

“Introduce me, now there’s a good fellow,” he said, 
“If we happen to meet it together!” 

And the Bellman, sagaciously nodding his head. 

Said “That must depend on the weather.” 

The Beaver went simply galumphing about. 

At seeing the Butcher so shy: 

And even the Baker, though stupid and stout, 

Made an effort to wink with one eye. 

“Be a man!” said the Bellman in wrath, as he heard 
The Butcher beginning to sob. 

“Should we meet with a Jubjub, that desperate bird, 
We shall need all our strength for the job!” 


Fit the Fifth 
The Beaver’s Lesson 

They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care 
They pursued it with forks and hope; 

They threatened its life with a railway-share; 

They charmed it with smiles and soap. 

Then the Butcher contrived an ingenious plan 
For making a separate sally; 

And had fixed on a spot unfrequented by man, 

A dismal and desolate valley. 

But the very same plan to the Beaver occurred: 

It had chosen the very same place: 

Yet neither betrayed, by a sign or a word. 

The disgust that appeared in his face. 



THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 691 

Each thought he was thinking of nothing but “Snark” 
And the glorious work of the day; 

And each tried to pretend that he did not remark 
That the other was going that way. 

But the valley grew narrower and narrower still, 

And the evening got darker and colder, 

Till (merely from nervousness, not from good will) 

They marched along shoulder to shoulder. 

Then a scream, shrill and high, rent the shuddering sky 
And they knew that some danger was near: 

The Beaver turned pale to the tip of its tail, 

And even the Butcher felt queer. 

He thought of his childhood, left far behind— 

That blissful and innocent state— 

The sound so exactly recalled to his mind 
A pencil that squeaks on a slate! 

“ 'Tis the voice of the Jubjub!” he suddenly cried. 

(This man, that they used to call “Dunce”.) 

“As the Bellman would tell you,” he added with pride, 

“I have uttered that sentiment once. 

“ ’Tis the note of the Jubjub! Keep count, I entreat. 

You will find I have told it you twice. 

’Tis the song of the Jubjub! The proof is complete. 

If only I’ve stated it thrice.” 

The Beaver had counted with scrupulous care, 

Attending to every word: 

But it fairly lost heart, and outgrabe in despair, 

When the third repetition occurred. 

It felt that, in spite of all possible pains, 

It had somehow contrived to lose count, 

And the only thing now was to rack its poor brains 
By reckoning up the amount. 



VERSE 


692 

"Two added to one—if that could but be done”. 

It said, "with one’s fingers and thumbs!” 

Recollecting with tears how, in earlier years, 

It had taken no pains with its sums. 

"The thing can be done,” said the Butcher, "I think. 
The thing must be done, I am sure. 

The thing shall be done! Bring me paper and ink, 

The best there is time to procure.” 

The Beaver brought paper, portfolio, pens, 

And ink in unfailing supplies: 

While strange creepy creatures came out of their dens, 
And watched them with wondering eyes. 

So engrossed was the Butcher, he heeded them not, 

As he wrote with a pen in each hand, 

And explained all the while in a popular style 
Which the Beaver could well understand. 

"Taking Three as the subject to reason about— 

A convenient number to state— 

We add Seven, and Ten, and then multiply out 
By One Thousand diminished by Eight. 

"The result we proceed to divide, as you see, 

By Nine Hundred and Ninety and Two: 

Then subtract Seventeen, and the answer must be 
Exactly and perfectly true. 

"The method employed I would gladly explain, 

While I have it so clear in my head, 

If I had but the time and you had but the brain— 

But much yet remains to be said. 

"In one moment I’ve seen what has hitherto been 
Enveloped in absolute mystery. 

And without extra charge I will give you at large 
A Lesson in Natural History.” 



THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 693 

In his genial way he proceeded to say 
(Forgetting all laws of propriety, 

And that giving instruction, without introduction, 

Would have caused quite a thrill in Society), 

“As to temper the Jubjub’s a desperate bird. 

Since it lives in perpetual passion: 

Its taste in costume is entirely absurd— 

It is ages ahead of the fashion: 

“But it knows any friend it has met once before: 

It never will look at a bribe: 

And in charity-meetings it stands at the door, 

And collects—though it does not subscribe. 

“Its flavour when cooked is more exquisite far 
Than mutton, or oysters, or eggs: 

(Some think it keeps best in an ivory jar, 

And some, in mahogany kegs:) 

“You boil it in sawdust: you salt it in glue: 

You condense it with locusts and tape: 

Still keeping one principal object in view— 

To preserve its symmetrical shape.” 

The Butcher would gladly have talked till next day, 

But he felt that the Lesson must end, 

And he wept with delight in attempting to say 
He considered the Beaver his friend: 

While the Beaver confessed, with affectionate looks 
More eloquent even than tears, 

It had learned in ten minutes far more than all books 
Would have taught it in seventy years. 

They returned hand-in-hand, and the Bellman, unmanned 
(For a moment) with noble emotion, 

Said "This amply repays all the wearisome days 
We have spent on the billowy ocean!” 



VERSE 


694 

Such friends, as the Beaver and Butcher became, 
Have seldom if ever been known; 

In winter or summer, ’twas always the same— 
You could never meet either alone. 

And when quarrels arose—as one frequently finds 
Quarrels will, spite of every endeavour— 

The song of the Jubjub recurred to their minds. 
And cemented their friendship for ever! 


Fit the Sixth 
The Barrister’s Dream 

They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care; 

They pursued it with forks and hope; 

They threatened its life with a railway-share; 

They charmed it with smiles and soap. 

But the Barrister, weary of proving in vain 
That the Beaver’s lace-making was wrong, 

Fell asleep, and in dreams saw the creature quite plain 
That his fancy had dwelt on so long. 

He dreamed that he stood in a shadowy Court, 

Where the Snark, with a glass in its eye, 

Dressed in gown, bands, and wig, was defending a pig 
On the charge of deserting its sty. 

The Witnesses proved, without error or flaw, 

That the sty was deserted when found: 

And the Judge kept explaining the state of the law 
In a soft under-current of sound. 

The indictment had never been clearly expressed, 

And it seemed that the Snark had begun, 

And had spoken three hours, before any one guessed 
What the pig was supposed to have done. 



THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 695 

The Jury had each formed a different view 
(Long before the indictment was read), 

And they all spoke at once, so that none of them knew 
One word that the others had said. 

"You must know-” said the Judge: but the Snark ex¬ 

claimed "Fudge! 

That statute is obsolete quite! 

Let me tell you, my friends, the whole question depends 
On an ancient manorial right. 

"In the matter of Treason the pig would appear 
To have aided, but scarcely abetted: 

While the charge of Insolvency fails, it is clear. 

If you grant the plea ‘never indebted'. 

“The fact of Desertion I will not dispute: 

But its guilt, as I trust, is removed 
(So far as relates to the costs of this suit) 

By the Alibi which has been proved. 

"My poor client’s fate now depends on your votes." 

Here the speaker sat down in his place, 

And directed the Judge to refer to his notes 
And briefly to sum up the case. 

But the Judge said he never had summed up before; 

So the Snark undertook it instead, 

And summed it so well that it came to far more 
Than the Witnesses ever had said! 

When the verdict was called for, the Jury declined, 

As the word was so puzzling to spell; 

But they ventured to hope that the Snark wouldn’t mind 
Undertaking that duty as well. 

So the Snark found the verdict, although, as it owned, 

It was spent with the toils of the day: 



VERSE 


696 

When it said the word “GUILTY!” the Jury all groaned 
And some of them fainted away. 

Then the Snark pronounced sentence, the Judge being 
quite 

Too nervous to utter a word: 

When it rose to its feet, there was silence like night, 

And the fall of a pin might be heard. 

“Transportation for life” was the sentence it gave, 

“And then to be fined forty pound.” 

The Jury all cheered, though the Judge said he feared 
That the phrase was not legally sound. 

But their wild exultation was suddenly checked 
When the jailer informed them, with tears, 

Such a sentence would have not the slightest effect, 

As the pig had been dead for some years. 

The Judge left the Court, looking deeply disgusted 
But the Snark, though a little aghast, 

As the lawyer to whom the defence was intrusted, 

Went bellowing on to the last. 

Thus the Barrister dreamed, while the bellowing seemed 
To grow every moment more clear: 

Till he woke to the knell of a furious bell, 

Which the Bellman rang close at his ear. 


Fit the Seventh 
The Banker’s Fate 

They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care; 

They pursued it with forks and hope; 

They threatened its life with a railway-share; 

They charmed it with smiles and soap. 



THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 


697 


And the Banker, inspired with a courage so new 
It was matter for general remark, 

Rushed madly ahead and was lost to their view 
In his zeal to discover the Snark. 

But while he was seeking with thimbles and care, 

A Bandersnatch swiftly drew nigh 
And grabbed at the Banker, who shrieked in despair. 

For he knew it was useless to fly. 

He offered large discount—he offered a cheque 
(Drawn “to bearer") for seven-pounds-ten: 

But the Bandersnatch merely extended its neck 
And grabbed at the Banker again. 

Without rest or pause—while those frumious jaws 
Went savagely snapping around— 

He skipped and he hopped, and he floundered and flopped, 
Till fainting he fell to the ground. 

The Bandersnatch fled as the others appeared 
Led on by that fear-stricken yell: 

And the Bellman remarked “It is just as I feared!" 

And solemnly tolled on his bell. 

He was black in the face, and they scarcely could trace 
The least likeness to what he had been: 

While so great was his fright that his waistcoat turned 
white— 

A wonderful thing to be seen! 

To the horror of all who were present that day, 

He uprose in full evening dress. 

And with senseless grimaces endeavoured to say 
What his tongue could no longer express. 

Down he sank in a chair—ran his hands through his 
hair— 

And chanted in mimsiest tones 



VERSE 


698 

Words whose utter inanity proved his insanity, 
While he rattled a couple of bones. 

“Leave him here to his fate—it is getting so late!’’ 

The Bellman exclaimed in a fright. 

“We have lost half the day. Any further delay. 
And we sha’n’t catch a Snark before night!’’ 


Fit the Eighth 
The Vanishing 

They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care 
They pursued it with forks and hope; 

They threatened its life with a railway-share; 

They charmed it with smiles and soap. 

They shuddered to think that the chase might fail. 

And the Beaver, excited at last, 

Went bounding along on the tip of its tail. 

For the daylight was nearly past. 

“There is Thingumbob shouting!” the Bellman said. 

“He is shouting like mad, only hark! 

He is waving his hands, he is wagging his head. 

He has certainly found a Snark!” 

They gazed in delight, while the Butcher exclaimed 
"He was always a desperate wag!” 

They beheld him—their Baker—their hero unnamed— 
On the top of a neighbouring crag, 

Erect and sublime, for one moment of time. 

In the next, that wild figure they saw 
(As if stung by a spasm) plunge into a chasm. 

While they waited and listened in awe. 



THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK 699 

“It’s a Snark!’’ was the sound that first came to their ears. 
And seemed almost too good to be true. 

Then followed a torrent of laughter and cheers: 

Then the ominous words “It’s a Boo-” 

Then, silence. Some fancied they heard in the air 
A weary and wandering sigh 

That sounded like “—jum!” but the others declare 
It was only a breeze that went by. 

They hunted till darkness came on, but they found 
Not a button, or feather, or mark, 

By which they could tell that they stood on the ground 
Where the Baker had met with the Snark. 

In the midst of the word he was trying to say, 

In the midst of his laughter and glee, 

He had softly and suddenly vanished away— 

For the Snark was a Boojum, you see. 



EARLY VERSE 


MY FAIRY 

(1845) 

I H A ve a fairy by my side 
Which says I must not sleep, 

When once in pain I loudly cried 
It said “You must not weep”. 

If, full of mirth, I smile and grin, 

It says “You must not laugh”; 

When once I wished to drink some gin 
It said “You must not quaff”. 

When once a meal I wished to taste 
It said “You must not bite”; 

When to the wars I went in haste 
It said “You must not fight”. 

“What may I do?” at length I cried. 
Tired of the painful task. 

The fairy quietly replied, 

And said “You must not ask”. 

Moral: “You mustn’t.” 


700 



EARLY VERSE 


701 


PUNCTUALITY 

Man naturally loves delay, 

And to procrastinate; 

Business put oft from day to day 
Is always done too late. 

Let every hour be in its place 
Firm fixed, nor loosely shift, 

And well enjoy the vacant space. 

As though a birthday gift. 

And when the hour arrives, be there. 
Where’er that "there” may be; 

Uncleanly hands or ruffled hair 
Let no one ever see. 

If dinner at "half-past” be placed, 

At "half-past” then be dressed. 

If at a "quarter-past” make haste 
To be down with the rest. 

Better to be before your time, 

Than e’er to be behind; 

To ope the door while strikes the chime, 
That shows a punctual mind. 


Moral 

Let punctuality and care 
Seize every flitting hour, 

So shalt thou cull a floweret fair. 
E’en from a fading flower. 



7 02 


VERSE 


MELODIES 

I 

There was an old farmer of Readall, 

Who made holes in his face with a needle, 
Then went far deeper in 
Than to pierce through the skin, 

And yet strange to say he was made beadle. 

II 

There was an eccentric old draper, 

Who wore a hat made of brown paper, 

It went up to a point, 

Yet it looked out of joint, 

The cause of which he said was “vapour”. 

III 

There was once a young man of Oporta, 
Who daily got shorter and shorter, 

The reason he said 
Was the hod on his head, 

Which was filled with the heaviest mortar. 

His sister, named Lucy O’Finner, 

Grew constantly thinner and thinner; 

The reason was plain, 

She slept out in the rain, 

And was never allowed any dinner. 


BROTHER AND SISTER 

“Sister, sister, go to bed! 

Go and rest your weary head.” 

Thus the prudent brother said. 



EARLY VERSE 


“Do you want a battered hide, 

Or scratches to your face applied?” 
Thus his sister calm replied. 

“Sister, do not raise my wrath. 

I’d make you into mutton broth 
As easily as kill a moth!” 

The sister raised her beaming eye 
And looked on him indignantly 
And sternly answered, “Only try!” 

Off to the cook he quickly ran. 

“Dear Cook, please lend a frying-pan 
To me as quickly as you can.” 

“And wherefore should I lend it you?” 
“The reason, Cook, is plain to view. 

I wish to make an Irish stew.” 

“What meat is in that stew to go?” 
“My sister’ll be the contents!” 

“Oh!” 

“You’ll lend the pan to me, Cook?” 

“No!” 

Moral: Never stew your sister. 


FACTS 

Were I to take an iron gun, 

And fire it off towards the sun; 

I grant’twould reach its mark at last, 
But not till many years had passed. 

But should that bullet change its force. 
And to the planets take its course, 

’Twould never reach the nearest star. 
Because it is so very far. 



VERSE 


RULES AND REGULATIONS 

A short direction 
To avoid dejection, 

By variations 
In occupations. 

And prolongation 
Of relaxation. 

And combinations 
Of recreations. 

And disputation 
On the state of the nation 
In adaptation 
To your station. 

By invitations 
To friends and relations. 

By evitation 
Of amputation. 

By permutation 
In conversation. 

And deep reflection 
You’ll avoid dejection. 

Learn well your grammar. 

And never stammer, 

Write well and neatly, 

And sing most sweetly, 

Be enterprising, 

Love early rising, 

Go walk of six miles, 

Have ready quick smiles, 

With lightsome laughter, 

Soft flowing after. 

Drink tea, not coffee; 

Never eat toffy. 

Eat bread with butter. 

Once more, don’t stutter. 



EARLY VERSE 


Don’t waste your money, 
Abstain from honey. 

Shut doors behind you, 

(Don’t slam them, mind you.) 
Drink beer, not porter. 

Don’t enter the water 
Till to swim you are able. 

Sit close to the table. 

Take care of a candle. 

Shut a door by the handle, 
Don't push with your shoulder 
Until you are older. 

Lose not a button. 

Refuse cold mutton. 

Starve your canaries. 

Believe in fairies. 

If you are able, 

Don’t have a stable 
With any mangers. 

Be rude to strangers. 

Moral: Behave. 


HORRORS 

(1850) 

MethoughtI walked a dismal place 
Dim horrors all around; 

The air was thick with many a face, 
And black as night the ground. 

I saw a monster come with speed, 

Its face of grimmliest green, 

On human beings used to feed, 

Most dreadful to be seen. 



VERSE 


I could not speak, I could not fly, 

I fell down in that place, 

I saw the monster’s horrid eye 
Come leering in my face! 

Amidst my scarcely-stifled groans, 
Amidst my moanings deep, 

I heard a voice, "Wake! Mr. Jones, 
You're screaming in your sleep!” 


MISUNDERSTANDINGS 

I f such a thing had been my thought, 

I should have told you so before, 

But as I didn’t, then you ought 
To ask for such a thing no more, 

For to teach one who has been taught 
Is always thought an awful bore. 

Now to commence my argument, 

I shall premise an observation, 

On which the greatest kings have leant 
When striving to subdue a nation, 

And e’en the wretch who pays no rent 
By it can solve a hard equation. 

Its truth is such, the force of reason 
Can not avail to shake its power, 

Yet e’en the sun in summer season 
Doth not dispel so mild a shower 
As this, and he who sees it, sees on 
Beyond it to a sunny bower— 

No more, when ignorance is treason. 
Let wisdom’s brows be cold and sour. 



EARLY VERSE 


AS IT FELL UPON A DAY 

A s I was sitting on the hearth 
(And 0, but a hog is fat!) 

A man came hurrying up the path, 

(And what care I for that?) 

When he came the house unto. 

His breath both quick and short he drew. 

When he came before the door, 

His face grew paler than before. 

When he turned the handle round, 

The man fell fainting to the ground. 

When he crossed the lofty hall, 

Once and again I heard him fall. 

When he came up to the turret stair, 

He shrieked and tore his raven hair. 

When he came my chamber in, 

(And 0, but a hog is fat!) 

I ran him through with a golden pin, 
(And what care I for that?) 


YE FATTALE CHEYSE 

Ytte wes a mirke an dreiry cave, 
Weet scroggis 1 owr ytte creepe. 
Gurgles withyn ye flowan wave 
Throw channel braid an deep 


1 bushes. 



708 


VERSE 


Never withyn that dreir recesse 
Wes sene ye lyghte of daye, 

Quhat bode azont 1 yts mirkinesse 2 
Nane kend an nane mote saye. 

Ye monarche rade owr brake an brae 
An drave ye yellynge packe, 

Hiz meany 3 au’ richte cadgily 4 
Are wendynge 5 yn hiz tracke. 

Wi’ eager iye, wi’ yalpe an crye 
Ye hondes yode 6 down ye rocks, 

Ahead of au' their companye 
Renneth ye panky 7 foxe. 

Ye foxe hes soughte that cave of awe 
Forewearied 8 wi’ hiz rin. 

Quha nou ys he sae bauld an braw 8 
To dare to enter yn? 

Wi’ eager bounde hes ilka honde 
Gane till that caverne dreir, 

Fou 10 many a yowl u ys 12 hearde arounde, 
Fou 10 many a screech of feir. 

Like ane wi’ thirstie appetite 
Quha swalloweth orange pulp, 

Wes hearde a huggle an a bite, 

A swallow an a gulp. 

Ye kynge hes lap frae aff hiz steid, 
Outbrayde 13 hiz trenchant brande; 

1 beyond. 8 much wearied. 

8 darkness. * brave. 

8 company. 10 full. 

4 merrily. 11 howl. 

6 going journeying. 12 is. 

8 went. 13 drawn. 

7 cunning. 



EARLY VERSE 


709 


“Quha on my packe of hondes doth feed, 
Maun deye benead thilke hande.” 

Sae sed, sae dune: ye stonderes 1 hearde 
Fou many a mickle 2 stroke, 

Sowns 3 lyke ye flappynge of a birde, 

A struggle an a choke. 

Owte of ye cave scarce fette 4 they ytte, 
Wi pow 5 an push an hau' 6 — 

Whereof Y’ve drawne a littel bytte, 

Bot durst not draw ytte au. 7 


LAYS OF SORROW 

No. 1 

The day was wet, the rain fell souse 
Like jars of strawberry jam, 8 a 
Sound was heard in the old henhouse, 

A beating of a hammer. 

Of stalwart form, and visage warm, 

Two youths were seen within it, 

Splitting up an old tree into perches for their poultry 
At a hundred strokes 9 a minute. 

The work is done, the hen has taken 
Possession of her nest and eggs, 

Without a thought of eggs and bacon, 10 
(Or I am very much mistaken:) 

1 bystanders. 5 pull. 

2 heavy. 6 haul. 

3 sounds. 7 all. 

4 fetched. 

8 1.e. the jam without the jars. Observe the beauty of this rhyme. 
* At the rate of a stroke and two-thirds in a second. 

10 Unless the hen was a poacher, which is unlikely. 



7io 


VERSE 


She turns over each shell, 

To be sure that all's well. 

Looks into the straw 
To see there’s no flaw, 

Goes once round the house, 1 
Half afraid of a mouse, 

Then sinks calmly to rest 
On the top of her nest, 

First doubling up each of her legs. 

Time rolled away, and so did every shell, 

"Small by degrees and beautifully less," 

As the sage mother with a powerful spell 2 

Forced each in turn its contents to express, 3 
But ah! “imperfect is expression,” 

Some poet said, I don’t care who, 

If you want to know you must go elsewhere, 

One fact I can tell, if you’re willing to hear, 

He never attended a Parliament Session, 

For I’m certain that if he had ever been there, 
Full quickly would he have changed his ideas, 
With the hissings, the hootings, the groans and 
cheers. 

And as to his name it is pretty clear 
That it wasn’t me and it wasn’t you! 


And so it fell upon a day, 

(That is, it never rose again) 

A chick was found upon the hay, 

Its little life had ebbed away. 

No longer frolicsome and gay, 

No longer could it run or play. 

"And must we, chicken, must we part?” 

Its master 4 cried with bursting heart, 

And voice of agony and pain. 

1 The henhouse. 2 Beak and claw. 

3 Press out. 

4 Probably one of the two stalwart youths. 



EARLY VERSE 


711 

So one, whose ticket's marked "Return", 1 
When to the lonely roadside station 
He flies in fear and perturbation, 

Thinks of his home—the hissing urn— 

Then runs with flying hat and hair, 

And, entering, finds to his despair 

He’s missed the very latest train. 2 

Too long it were to tell of each conjecture 
Of chicken suicide, and poultry victim. 

The deadly frown, the stern and dreary lecture. 

The timid guess, "perhaps some needle pricked him!" 
The din of voice, the words both loud and many, 

The sob, the tear, the sigh that none could smother. 
Till all agreed "a shilling to a penny 

It killed itself, and we acquit the mother!" 

Scarce was the verdict spoken. 

When that still calm was broken, 

A childish form hath burst into the throng; 

With tears and looks of sadness, 

That bring no news of gladness, 

But tell too surely something hath gone wrong! 

"The sight that I have come upon 
The stoutest heart 3 would sicken. 

That nasty hen has been and gone 
And killed another chicken!” 

1 The system of return tickets is an excellent one. People are 
conveyed, on particular days, there and back again for one fare. 

2 An additional vexation would be that his “Return” ticket 
would be no use the next day. 

3 Perhaps even the “bursting” heart of its master. 



712 


VERSE 


LAYS OF SORROW 
No. 2 

Fair stands the ancient 1 Rectory, 

The Rectory of Croft, 

The sun shines bright upon it. 

The breezes whisper soft. 

From all the house and garden, 

Its inhabitants come forth, 

And muster in the road without, 

And pace in twos and threes about, 

The children of the North. 

Some are waiting in the garden, 

Some are waiting at the door, 

And some are following behind, 

And some have gone before. 

But wherefore all this mustering ? 

Wherefore this vast array? 

A gallant feat of horsemanship 
Will be performed to-day. 

To eastward and to westward, 

The crowd divides amain, 

Two youths are leading on the steed, 

Both tugging at the rein; 

And sorely do they labour, 

For the steed 2 is very strong, 

1 This Rectory has been supposed to have been built in the time 
of Edward VI, but recent discoveries clearly assign its origin to a 
much earlier period. A stone has been found in an island formed 
by the river Tees on which is inscribed the letter “A”, which is 
justly conjectured to stand for the name of the great King Alfred, 
in whose reign this house was probably built. 

* The poet entreats pardon for having represented a donkey 
under this dignified name. 



EARLY VERSE 


713 


And backward moves its stubborn feet, 

And backward ever doth retreat, 

And drags its guides along. 

And now the knight hath mounted, 

Before the admiring band, 

Hath got the stirrups on his feet, 

The bridle in his hand. 

Yet, oh! beware, sir horseman! 

And tempt thy fate no more, 

For such a steed as thou hast got 
Was never rid before! 

The rabbits bow before thee, 

And cower in the straw; 

The chickens 1 are submissive, 

And own thy will for law; 

Bullfinches and canary 
Thy bidding do obey; 

And e’en the tortoise in its shell 
Doth never say thee nay. 

But thy steed will hear no master, 

Thy steed will bear no stick, 

And woe to those that beat her, 

And woe to those that kick! 2 
For though her rider smite her, 

As hard as he can hit, 

And strive to turn her from the yard, 

She stands in silence, pulling hard 
Against the pulling bit. 

And now the road to Dalton 
Hath felt their coming tread, 

1 A full account of the history and misfortunes of these inter¬ 
esting creatures may be found in the first “Lay of Sorrow”. 

2 It is a singular fact that a donkey makes a point of returning 
any kicks offered to it. 



714 


VERSE 


The crowd are speeding on before, 

And all have gone ahead. 

Yet often look they backward, 

And cheer him on, and bawl, 

For slower still, and still more slow, 

That horseman and that charger go, 

And scarce advance at all. 

And now two roads to choose from 
Are in that rider’s sight: 

In front the road to Dalton, 

And New Croft upon the right. 

“I ca’n’t get by!” he bellows, 

"I really am not able! 

Though I pull my shoulder out of joint, 

I cannot get him past this point, 

For it leads unto his stable!” 

Then out spake Ulfrid Longbow, 1 
A valiant youth was he, 

“Lo! I will stand on thy right hand 
And guard the pass for thee!” 

And out spake fair Flureeza, 2 
His sister eke was she, 

“I will abide on thy other side, 

And turn thy steed for thee!” 

And now commenced a struggle 
Between that steed and rider, 

For all the strength that he hath left 
Doth not suffice to guide her. 

Though Ulfrid and his sister 
Have kindly stopped the way. 

And all the crowd have cried aloud, 

“We can’t wait here all day!” 

1 This valiant knight, besides having a heart of steel and nerves 
of iron, has been lately in the habit of carrying a brick in his eye. 

2 She was sister to both. 



EARLY VERSE 


715 


Round turned he as not deigning 
Their words to understand, 

But he slipped the stirrups from his feet 
The bridle from his hand, 

And grasped the mane full lightly, 

And vaulted from his seat, 

And gained the road in triumph, 1 
And stood upon his feet. 

All firmly till that moment 
Had Ulfrid Longbow stood, 

And faced the foe right valiantly, 

As every warrior should. 

But when safe on terra firma 
His brother he did spy, 

“What did you do that for?” he cried, 

Then unconcerned he stepped aside 
And let it canter by. 

They gave him bread and butter, 2 
That was of public right, 

As much as four strong rabbits 
Could munch from morn to night, 

For he’d done a deed of daring, 

And faced that savage steed, 

And therefore cups of coffee sweet, 

And everything that was a treat, 

Were but his right and meed. 

And often in the evenings, 

When the fire is blazing bright, 

When books bestrew the table 
And moths obscure the light, 

1 The reader will probably be at a loss to discover the nature of 
this triumph, as no object was gained, and the donkey was obvi¬ 
ously the victor; on this point, however, we are sorry to say we 
can offer no good explanation. 

2 Much more acceptable to a true knight than “corn-land” 
which the Roman people were so foolish as to give to their daring 
champion, Horatius. 



716 


VERSE 


When crying children go to bed, 

A struggling, kicking load; 

We’ll talk of Ulfrid Longbow’s deed, 
How, in his brother’s utmost need, 
Back to his aid he flew with speed, 
And how he faced the fiery steed, 
And kept the New Croft Road. 


THE TWO BROTHERS 

(1853) 

There were two brothers at Twyford school, 

And when they had left the place, 

It was, “Will ye learn Greek and Latin? 

Or will ye run me a race? 

Or will ye go up to yonder bridge, 

And there we will angle for dace?” 

“I'm too stupid for Greek and for Latin, 

I'm too lazy by half for a race, 

So I’ll even go up to yonder bridge, 

And there we will angle for dace.” 

He has fitted together two joints of his rod, 

And to them he has added another, 

And then a great hook he took from his book, 

And ran it right into his brother. 

Oh much is the noise that is made among boys 
When playfully pelting a pig, 

But a far greater pother was made by his brother 
When flung from the top of the brigg. 

The fish hurried up by the dozens, 

All ready and eager to bite. 

For the lad that he flung was so tender and young, 
It quite gave them an appetite. 



EARLY VERSE 


Said he, “Thus shall he wallop about 
And the fish take him quite at their ease, 

For me to annoy it was ever his joy, 

Now I’ll teach him the meaning of ‘Tees'!” 

The wind to his ear brought a voice, 

“My brother, you didn't had ought ter! 

And what have I done that you think it such fun 
To indulge in the pleasure of slaughter? 

“A good nibble or bite is my chiefest delight, 
When I’m merely expected to see, 

But a bite from a fish is not quite what I wish, 
When I get it performed upon me; 

And just now here’s a swarm of dace at my arm, 
And a perch has got hold of my knee. 

“For water my thirst was not great at the first, 
And of fish I have quite sufficien-” 

“Oh fear not!” he cried, “for whatever betide, 

We are both in the selfsame condition! 

“I am sure that our state’s very nearly alike 
(Not considering the question of slaughter), 

For I have my perch on the top of the bridge, 

And you have your perch in the water. 

“I stick to my perch and your perch sticks to you. 
We are really extremely alike; 

I’ve a turn-pike up here, and I very much fear 
You may soon have a turn with a pike. ” 

“Oh, grant but one wish! If I’m took by a fish 
(For your bait is your brother, good man!) 

Pull him up if you like, but I hope you will strike 
As gently as ever you can.” 



VERSE 


718 

"If the fish be a trout, I’m afraid there’s no doubt 
I must strike him like lightning that’s greased; 

If the fish be a pike, I’ll engage not to strike. 

Till I've waited ten minutes at least.” 

"But in those ten minutes to desolate Fate 
Your brother a victim may fall!” 

"I’ll reduce it to five, so perhaps you’ll survive, 

But the chance is exceedingly small.” 

"Oh hard is your heart for to act such a part; 

Is it iron, or granite, or steel?” 

"Why, I really can't say—it is many a day 
Since my heart was accustomed to feel. 

" ’Twas my heart-cherished wish for to slay many fish 
Each day did my malice grow worse, 

For my heart didn’t soften with doing it so often 
But rather, I should say, the reverse.” 

"Oh would I were back at Twyford school, 

Learning lessons in fear of the birch!” 

"Nay, brother!” he cried, "for whatever betide, 

You are better off here with your perch! 

"Iam sure you’ll allow you are happier now, 

With nothing to do but to play; 

And this single line here, it is perfectly clear, 

Is much better than thirty a day! 

"And as to the rod hanging over your head, 

And apparently ready to fall, 

That, you know, was the case, when you lived in that 
place, 

So it need not be reckoned at all. 

"Do you see that old trout with a turn-up-nose snout? 

(Just to speak on a pleasanter theme), 

Observe, my dear brother, our love for each other— 

He’s the one I like best in the stream. 



EARLY VERSE 


“To-morrow I mean to invite him to dine 
(We shall all of us think it a treat); 

If the day should be fine, I’ll just drop him a line, 
And we’ll settle what time we’re to meet. 

"He hasn’t been into society yet. 

And his manners are not of the best. 

So I think it quite fair that it should be my care. 

To see that he’s properly dressed.” 

Many words brought the wind of “cruel” and “kind” 
And that "man suffers more than the brute”: 

Each several word with patience he heard, 

And answered with wisdom to boot. 

“What? prettier swimming in the stream, 

Than lying all snugly and flat? 

Do but look at that dish filled with glittering fish, 
Has Nature a picture like that? 

“What? a higher delight to be drawn from the sight 
Of fish full of life and of glee? 

What a noodle you are! 'tis delightfuller far 
To kill them than let them go free! 

“I know there are people who prate by the hour 
Of the beauty of earth, sky, and ocean; 

Of the birds as they fly, of the fish darting by, 
Rejoicing in Life and in Motion. 

“As to any delight to be got from the sight, 

It is all very well for a flat. 

But I think it all gammon, for hooking a salmon 
Is better than twenty of that! 

“They say that a man of a right-thinking mind 
Will love the dumb creatures he sees— 

What’s the use of his mind, if he’s never inclined 
To pull a fish out of the Tees? 



VERSE 


720 

“Take my friends and my home—as an outcast I'll roam: 
Take the money I have in the Bank; 

It is just what I wish, but deprive me of fish. 

And my life would indeed be a blank!” 

Forth from the house his sister came. 

Her brothers for to see, 

But when she saw that sight of awe, 

The tear stood in her e’e. 

“Oh what bait’s that upon your hook, 

My brother, tell to me?” 

“It is but the fantailed pigeon, 

He would not sing for me.” 

“Whoe’er would expect a pigeon to sing, 

A simpleton he must be! 

But a pigeon-cote is a different thing 
To the coat that there I see!” 

“Oh what bait’s that upon your hook, 

Dear brother, tell to me?” 

“It is my younger brother,” he cried, 

“Oh woe and dole is me! 

“I’s mighty wicked, that I is! 

Or how could such things be? 

Farewell, farewell, sweet sister, 

I’m going o’er the sea.” 

“And when will you come back again, 

My brother, tell to me?” 

“When chub is good for human food, 

And that will never be!” 

She turned herself right round about, 

And her heart brake into three, 

Said, "One of the two will be wet through and through, 
And t’other’ll be late for his tea!” 



EARLY VERSE 


721 


THE LADY OF THE LADLE 

(1854) 

T h e Youth at Eve had drunk his fill, 
Where stands the "Royal” on the Hill, 
And long his mid-day stroll had made, 

On the so-called "Marine Parade”— 
(Meant, I presume, for Seamen brave. 
Whose "march is on the Mountain wave”; 
’Twere just the bathing-place for him 
Who stays on land till he can swim)— 
And he had strayed into the Town, 

And paced each alley up and down, 

Where still, so narrow grew the way, 

The very houses seemed to say, 

Nodding to friends across the Street, 

"One struggle more and we shall meet.” 
And he had scaled that wondrous stair 
That soars from earth to upper air, 

Where rich and poor alike must climb, 
And walk the treadmill for a time. 

That morning he had dressed with care, 
And put Pomatum on his hair; 

He was, the loungers all agreed, 

A very heavy swell indeed: 

Men thought him, as he swaggered by, 
Some scion of nobility, 

And never dreamed, so cold his look, 

That he had loved—and loved a Cook. 
Upon the beach he stood and sighed 
Unheedful of the treacherous tide; 

Thus sang he to the listening main, 

And soothed his sorrow with the strain! 


2 A 


L.C. 



722 


VERSE 


CORONACH 

“She is gone by the Hilda, 

She is lost unto Whitby, 

And her name is Matilda, 

Which my heart it was smit by; 
Tho’ I take the Goliah, 

I learn to my sorrow 
That ‘it wo'n’t’, said the crier, 

‘Be off till to-morrow.’ 

“She called me her ‘Neddy’, 

(Tho’ there mayn’t be much in it,) 
And I should have been ready, 

If she’d waited a minute; 

I was following behind her 
When, if you recollect, I 
Merely ran back to find a 
Gold pin for my neck-tie. 

“Rich dresser of suet! 

Prime hand at a sausage! 

I have lost thee, I rue it, 

And my fare for the passage! 
Perhaps she thinks it funny, 

Aboard of the Hilda, 

But I’ve lost purse and money, 

And thee, oh, my ’Tilda!’’ 

His pin of gold the youth undid 
And in his waistcoat-pocket hid. 
Then gently folded hand in hand, 
And dropped asleep upon the sand. 



EARLY VERSE 


723 


SHE’S ALL MY FANCY PAINTED HIM 

[This affecting fragment was found in MS. among the 
papers of the well-known author of “Was it You or I?” a 
tragedy, and the two popular novels, “Sister and Son”, and 
“The Niece’s Legacy, or the Grateful Grandfather”.] 

S h E ’ s all my fancy painted him 
(I make no idle boast); 

If he or you had lost a limb, 

Which would have suffered most ? 

He said that you had been to her, 

And seen me here before; 

But, in another character, 

She was the same of yore. 

There was not one that spoke to us, 

Of all that thronged the street: 

So he sadly got into a ’bus, 

And pattered with his feet. 

They sent him word I had not gone 
(We know it to be true); 

If she should push the matter on, 

What would become of you? 

They gave her one, they gave me two, 

They gave us three or more; 

They all returned from him to you, 

Though they were mine before. 

If I or she should chance to be 
Involved in this affair, 

He trusts to you to set them free, 

Exactly as we were. 



VERSE 


It seemed to me that you had been 
(Before she had this fit) 

An obstacle, that came between 
Him, and ourselves, and it. 

Don’t let him know she liked them best, 
For this must ever be 
A secret, kept from all the rest, 

Between yourself and me. 


PHOTOGRAPHY EXTRAORDINARY 

The Milk-and-Water School 

Alas ! she would not hear my prayer! 

Yet it were rash to tear my hair; 
Disfigured, I should be less fair. 

She was unwise, I may say blind; 

Once she was lovingly inclined; 

Some circumstance has changed her mind. 

The Strong-Minded or Matter-of-Fact School 

Well! so my offer was no go! 

She might do worse, I told her so; 

She was a fool to answer "No”. 

However, things are as they stood; 

Nor would I have her if I could, 

For there are plenty more as good. 

The Spasmodic or German School 

Firebrands and daggers! hope hath fled! 
To atoms dash the doubly dead! 

My brain is fire—my heart is lead! 



EARLY VERSE 


Her soul is flint, and what am I ? 
Scorch’d by her fierce, relentless eye, 
Nothingness is my destiny! 


LAYS OF MYSTERY, 
IMAGINATION, AND HUMOUR 

Number i 

THE PALACE OF HUMBUG 

IdreamtI dwelt in marble halls, 

And each damp thing that creeps and crawls 
Went wobble-wobble on the walls. 

Faint odours of departed cheese, 

Blown on the dank, unwholesome breeze, 
Awoke the never-ending sneeze. 

Strange pictures decked the arras drear, 
Strange characters of woe and fear, 

The humbugs of the social sphere. 

One showed a vain and noisy prig, 

That shouted empty words and big 
At him that nodded in a wig. 

And one, a dotard grim and gray, 

Who wasteth childhood’s happy day 
In work more profitless than play. 

Whose icy breast no pity warms, 

Whose little victims sit in swarms, 

And slowly sob on lower forms. 

And one, a green thyme-honoured Bank, 
Where flowers are growing wild and rank, 
Like weeds that fringe a poisoned tank. 



726 


VERSE 


All birds of evil omen there 
Flood with rich Notes the tainted air, 
The witless wanderer to snare. 

The fatal Notes neglected fall, 

No creature heeds the treacherous call, 
For all those goodly Strawn Baits Pall. 

The wandering phantom broke and fled, 
Straightway I saw within my head 
A vision of a ghostly bed, 

Where lay two worn decrepit men, 

The fictions of a lawyer’s pen, 

Who never more might breathe again. 

The serving-man of Richard Roe 
Wept, inarticulate with woe: 

She wept, that waited on John Doe. 

"Oh rouse”, I urged, "the waning sense 
With tales of tangled evidence, 

Of suit, demurrer, and defence.” 

“Vain”, she replied, “such mockeries: 
For morbid fancies, such as these, 

No suits can suit, no plea can please.” 

And bending o’er that man of straw, 
She cried in grief and sudden awe, 

Not inappropriately, "Law!” 

The well-remembered voice he knew, 
He smiled, he faintly muttered “Sue!” 
(Her very name was legal too.) 

The night was fled, the dawn was nigh: 
A hurricane went raving by, 

And swept the Vision from mine eye. 



EARLY VERSE 


72 7 

Vanished that dim and ghostly bed, 

(The hangings, tape; the tape was red:) 

’Tis o’er, and Doe and Roe are dead! 

Oh, yet my spirit inly crawls. 

What time it shudderingly recalls 
That horrid dream of marble halls! 

Oxford, 1855. 


THE MOCK TURTLE’S SONG 

Beneath the waters of the sea 
Are lobsters thick as thick can be— 
They love to dance with you and me, 
My own, my gentle Salmon! 

Chorus 

Salmon, come up! Salmon, go down! 
Salmon, come twist your tail around! 
Of all the fishes of the sea 

There’s none so good as Salmon! 


UPON THE LONELY MOOR 
(1856) 

[It is always interesting to ascertain the sources from 
which our great poets obtained their ideas: this motive has 
dictated the publication of the following: painful as its 
appearance must be to the admirers of Wordsworth and his 
poem of “Resolution and Independence”.] 

I met an aged, aged man 
Upon the lonely moor: 

I knew I was a gentleman, 

And he was but a boor. 



728 


VERSE 


So I stopped and roughly questioned him, 
“Come, tell me how you live!” 

But his words impressed my ear no more 
Than if it were a sieve. 


He said, "I look for soap-bubbles, 
That lie among the wheat, 

And bake them into mutton-pies, 
And sell them in the street. 

I sell them unto men”, he said, 

"Who sail on stormy seas; 

And that’s the way I get my bread— 
A trifle, if you please.” 


But I was thinking of a way 
To multiply by ten, 

And always, in the answer, get 
The question back again. 

I did not hear a word he said, 

But kicked that old man calm, 

And said, “Come, tell me how you live!” 
And pinched him in the arm. 


His accents mild took up the tale: 

He said, "I go my ways, 

And when I find a mountain-rill, 

I set it in a blaze. 

And thence they make a stuff they call 
Rowland’s Macassar Oil; 

But fourpence-halfpenny is all 
They give me for my toil.” 


But I was thinking of a plan 
To paint one’s gaiters green, 
So much the colour of the grass 
That they could ne’er be seen 



EARLY VERSE 


I gave his ear a sudden box, 

And questioned him again, 

And tweaked his grey and reverend locks, 
And put him into pain. 

He said, “I hunt for haddocks’ eyes 
Among the heather bright, 

And work them into waistcoat-buttons 
In the silent night. 

And these I do not sell for gold, 

Or coin of silver-mine, 

But for a copper-halfpenny, 

And that will purchase nine. 


“I sometimes dig for buttered rolls, 
Or set limed twigs for crabs; 

I sometimes search the flowery knolls 
For wheels of hansom cabs. 

And that's the way” (he gave a wink) 
“I get my living here, 

And very gladly will I drink 
Your Honour's health in beer.” 

I heard him then, for I had just 
Completed my design 
To keep the Menai bridge from rust 
By boiling it in wine. 

I duly thanked him, ere I went, 

For all his stories queer, 

But chiefly for his kind intent 
To drink my health in beer. 

And now if e'er by chance I put 
My fingers into glue. 

Or madly squeeze a right-hand foot 
Into a left-hand shoe; 



730 


VERSE 


Or if a statement I aver 
Of which I am not sure, 

I think of that strange wanderer 
Upon the lonely moor. 


MISS JONES 

(This frolicsome verse was written for a medley of twenty- 
two tunes that ranged from “The Captain and His Whiskers” 
to “Rule Britannia”.) 

'T i s a melancholy song, and it will not keep you long, 

Tho I specs it will work upon your feelings very strong, 

For the agonizing moans of Miss Arabella Jones 
Were warranted to melt the hearts of any paving stones. 
Simon Smith was tall and slim, and she doted upon him, 
But he always called her Miss Jones—he never got so far, 
As to use her Christian name—it was too familiar. 

When she called him “Simon dear” he pretended not to 
hear, 

And she told her sister Susan he behaved extremely queer, 
Who said, “Very right! very right! Shews his true affec¬ 
tion. 

If you’d prove your Simon’s love follow my direction. 

I’d certainly advise you just to write a simple letter, 

And to tell him that the cold he kindly asked about is 
better. 

And say that by the tanyard you will wait in loving hope, 
At nine o’clock this evening if he’s willing to elope 
With his faithful Arabella.” 

So she wrote it, & signed it, & sealed it, & sent it, & 
dressed herself out in her holiday things. 

With bracelets & brooches, & earrings, & necklace, a 
watch, & an eyeglass, & diamond rings, 

For man is a creature weak and impressible, thinks such a 
deal of appearance, my dear. 



EARLY VERSE 73I 

So she waited for her Simon beside the tanyard gate, re¬ 
gardless of the pieman, who hinted it was late. 

Waiting for Simon, she coughed in the chilly night, until 
the tanner found her, 

And kindly brought a light old coat to wrap around her. 

She felt her cold was getting worse, 

Yet still she fondly whispered, "Oh, take your time, my 
Simon, although I’ve waited long. 

I do not fear my Simon dear will fail to come at last, 

Although I know that long ago the time I named is past. 

My Simon! My Simon! Oh, charming man! Oh, charming 
man! 

Dear Simon Smith, sweet Simon Smith.” 

Oh, there goes the church-clock, the town-clock, the sta¬ 
tion-clock and there go the other clocks, they are all 
striking twelve! 

Oh, Simon, it is getting late, it’s very dull to sit and wait. 

And really I’m in such a state, I hope you’ll come at any 
rate, quite early in the morning, quite early in the 
morning. 

Then with prancing bays & yellow chaise, we’ll away to 
Gretna Green. 

For when I am with my Simon Smith—oh, that common 
name! Oh that vulgar name! 

I shall never rest happy till he’s changed that name, but 
when he has married me, maybe he’ll love me to that 
degree, that he’ll grant me my prayer 

And will call himself "Clare”— 

So she talked all alone, as she sat upon a stone, 

Still hoping he would come and find her, and she started 
most unkimmon, when instead of darling “Simmon” 
’twas a strange man that stood behind her, 

Who civilly observed "Good evening, M’am, 

I really am surprised to see that you’re out here alone, for 
you must own from thieves you’re not secure. 

A watch, I see. Pray lend it me (I hope the gold is pure). 

And all those rings, & other things—Don’t scream, you 
know, for long ago 



VERSE 


732 

The policeman off from his beat has gone. 

In the kitchen-” “Oh, you desperate villain! Oh, you 

treacherous thief!” 

And these were the words of her anger and grief. 

“When first to Simon Smith I gave my hand I never 
could have thought he would have acted half so mean 
as this. 

And where's the new police? Oh, Simon, Simon! how 
could you treat your love so ill ? ” 

They sit & chatter, they chatter with the cook, the 
guardians, so they're called, of public peace. 

Through the tanyard was heard the dismal sound, "How 
on earth is it policemen never, never, never, can be 
found?” 



PUZZLES FROM 
WONDERLAND 
I 

Dreaming of apples on a wall, 
And dreaming often, dear, 

I dreamed that, if I counted all, 
—How many would appear? 


II 

A stick I found that weighed two pound: 

I sawed it up one day 
In pieces eight of equal weight! 

How much did each piece weigh? 

(Everybody says “a quarter of a pound”, which is wrong.) 

III 

John gave his brother James a box: 

About it there were many locks. 

James woke and said it gave him pain; 

So gave it back to John again. 

The box was not with lid supplied, 

Yet caused two lids to open wide: 

And all these locks had never a key— 

What kind of a box, then, could it be? 


IV 

What is most like a bee in May? 

‘‘Well, let me think: perhaps-” you say. 

Bravo! You're guessing well to-day! 

733 



734 


VERSE 

V 


Three sisters at breakfast were feeding the cat, 

The first gave it sole—Puss was grateful for that: 

The next gave it salmon—which Puss thought a treat: 
The third gave it herring—which Puss wouldn’t eat. 

(Explain the conduct of the cat.) 

VI 

Said the Moon to the Sun, 

"Is the daylight begun?” 

Said the Sun to the Moon, 

"Not a minute too soon.” 

"You’re a Full Moon,” said he. 

She replied with a frown, 

"Well! I never did see 
So uncivil a clown!” 

(Query. Why was the moon so angry?) 

VII 

When the King found that his money was nearly all 
gone, and that he really must live more economically, he 
decided on sending away most of his Wise Men. There 
were some hundreds of them—very fine old men, and 
magnificently dressed in green velvet gowns with gold 
buttons: if they had a fault, it was that they always con¬ 
tradicted one another when he asked for their advice— 
and they certainly ate and drank enormously. So, on the 
whole, he was rather glad to get rid of them. But there 
was an old law, which he did not dare to disobey, which 
said that there must always be 

"Seven blind of both eyes: 

Two blind of one eye: 

Four that see with both eyes: 

Nine that see with one eye.” 

(Query. How many did he keep?) 



PUZZLES FROM WONDERLAND 


735 


SOLUTIONS TO PUZZLES 
FROM WONDERLAND 

I 

Ten. 

II 

In Shylock’s bargain for the flesh was found 
No mention of the blood that flowed around: 

So when the stick was sawed in eight, 

The sawdust lost diminished from the weight. 

III 

As curly-headed Jemmy was sleeping in bed, 

His brother John gave him a blow on the head; 
James opened his eyelids, and spying his brother, 
Doubled his fist, and gave him another. 

This kind of box then is not so rare; 

The lids are the eyelids, the locks are the hair, 

And so every schoolboy can tell to his cost, 

The key to the tangles is constantly lost. 

IV 

’Twixt “Perhaps” and “May be” 

Little difference we see: 

Let the question go round, 

The answer is found. 

V 

That salmon and sole Puss should think very grand 
Is no such remarkable thing. 

For more of these dainties Puss took up her stand; 
-But when the third sister stretched out her fair hand 
Pray why should Puss swallow her ring? 



736 


VERSE 


VI 

“In these degenerate days”, we oft hear said, 
“Manners are lost and chivalry is dead!” 

No wonder, since in high exalted spheres 
The same degeneracy, in fact, appears. 

The Moon, in social matters interfering, 

Scolded the Sun, when early in appearing; 

And the rude Sun, her gentle sex ignoring, 

Called her a fool, thus her pretensions flooring. 


VII 

Five seeing, and seven blind 
Give us twelve, in all, we find; 

But all of these, ’tis very plain, 

Come into account again. 

For take notice, it may be true, 

That those blind of one eye are blind for two; 

And consider contrariwise, 

That to see with your eye you may have your eyes; 

So setting one against the other— 

For a mathematician no great bother— 

And working the sum, you will understand 
That sixteen wise men still trouble the land. 



PROLOGUES TO PLAYS 


PROLOGUE TO “LA GUIDA DI BRAGIA” 

(From an opera written for Carroll’s Marionette Theatre.) 

Shall soldiers tread the murderous path of war, 
Without a notion what they do it for? 

Shall pallid mercers drive a roaring trade. 

And sell the stuffs their hands have never made? 

And shall not we, in this our mimic scene, 

Be all that better actors e’er have been? 

Awake again a Kemble’s tragic tone, 

And make a Liston’s humour all our own? 

Or vie with Mrs. Siddons in the art 
To rouse the feelings and to charm the heart? 

While Shakespeare’s self, with all his ancient fires, 
Lights up the forms that tremble on our wires? 

Why ca’n’t we have, in theatres ideal, 

The good, without the evil of the real? 

Why may not Marionettes be just as good 
As larger actors made of flesh and blood? 
Presumptuous thought! to you and your applause 
In humbler confidence we trust our cause. 


PROLOGUE 

(Misses Beatrice and Ethel Hatch, daughters of Dr. Edwin 
Hatch, Vice-principal of St. Mary Hall, were friends of the 
author. He wrote two plays for performance at their house.) 

Curtain rises and discovers the Speaker, who comes for¬ 
ward, thinking aloud, 

“Ladies and Gentlemen” seems stiff and cold. 

There’s something personal in “Young and Old”; 

I’ll try “Dear Friends” {addresses audience) 

Oh! let me call you so. 

737 



VERSE 


738 

Dear friends, look kindly on our little show. 
Contrast us not with giants in the Art, 

Nor say “You should see Sothern in that part”; 
Nor yet, unkindest cut of all, in fact. 

Condemn the actors, while you praise the Act. 
Having by coming proved you find a charm in it, 
Don’t go away, and hint there may be harm in it. 


Miss Crabb. My dear Miss Verjuice, can it really be? 
You’re just in time, love, for a cup of tea; 

And so, you went to see those people play. 

Miss Verjuice. Well! yes, Miss Crabb, and I may truly 
say 

You showed your wisdom when you stayed away. 

Miss C. Doubtless! Theatricals in our quiet town! 

I’ve always said, “The law should put them down,” 
They mean no harm, tho’ I begin to doubt it— 

But now sit down and tell me all about it. 

Miss V. Well then, Miss Crabb, I won’t deceive you, 
dear; 

I heard some things I-didn’t like to hear: 

Miss C. But don’t omit them now. 

MissV.' Well! No! I’ll try 

To tell you all the painful history. 

(They whisper alternately behind a small fan.) 

Miss V. And then, my dear. Miss Asterisk and he 
Pretended they were lovers!! 

Miss C. Gracious me !1 

(More whispering behind fan.) 


Speaker. 

What! Acting love!! And has that ne’er been seen 
Save with a row of footlights placed between? 

My gentle censors, let me roundly ask. 

Do none but actors ever wear a mask? 

Or have we reached at last that golden age 



PROLOGUES TO PLAYS 


739 


That finds deception only on the Stage? 

Come, let’s confess all round before we budge, 

When all are guilty, none should play the Judge, 

We’re actors all, a rhotley company, 

Some on the Stage, and others—on the sly— 

And guiltiest he who paints so well his phiz 
His brother actors scarce know what he is. 

A truce to moralizing; we invite 
The goodly company we see to-night 
To have the little banquet we have got, 

Well dressed, we hope, and served up hot & hot. 

“Loan of a Lover’’ is the leading dish, 

Concluding with a dainty course of fish; 

“Whitebait at Greenwich” in the best condition 
(By Mr. Gladstone’s very kind permission), 

Before the courses will be handed round 
An Entree made of Children, nicely browned. 

Bell rings. 

But hark! The bell to summon me away; 

They’re anxious to begin their little Play. 

One word before I go—We’ll do our best, 

And crave your kind indulgence for the rest; 

Own that at least we’ve striven to succeed, 

And take the good intention for the deed. 

Nov. 1871 


PROLOGUE 

Enter Beatrice, leading Wilfred. She leaves him at centre 
{front), and after going round on tip-toe, to make sure they 
are not overheard, returns and takes his arm. 

B. “Wiffie! I’m sure that something is the matter, 

All day there’s been—oh, such a fuss and clatter! 
Mamma’s been trying on a funny dress— 

I never saw the house in such a mess! 

(puts her arm round his neck) 
Is there a secret, Wiffie?” 





VERSE 


740 


{shaking her off) “Yes, of course!” 

“And you won’t tell it? {whimpers) Then you’re very 
cross! 

{turns away from him and clasps her hands, looking 
up ecstatically) 

I’m sure of thisl It’s something quite uncommon!” 

W. {stretching up his arms, with a mock-heroic air) 

“Oh, Curiosity! Thy name is Woman! 

(puts his arm round her coaxingly) 

Well, Birdie, then I’ll tell! {mysteriously) What 
should you say 

If they were going to act—a little play?” 

B. {jumping and clapping her hands) 

“I’dsay‘HOW NICE!'” 

W. {pointing to audience) 

“But will it please the rest?” 

B. “Oh yes! Because, you know, they’ll do their best! 
{turns to audience) 

You’ll praise them, won’t you, when you’ve seen the 
play? 

Just say ‘HOW NICE!’ before you go away!” 

{They run away hand in hand.) 

Feb. 14,1873. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 
Canto I 
The Trystyng 

One winter night, at half-past nine, 
Cold, tired, and cross, and muddy, 
I had come home, too late to dine, 

And supper, with cigars and wine, 

Was waiting in the study. 


There was a strangeness in the room, 
And Something white and wavy 
Was standing near me in the gloom— 
I took it for the carpet-broom 
Left by that careless slavey. 


But presently the Thing began 
To shiver and to sneeze: 

On which I said “Come, come, my man! 
That’s a most inconsiderate plan, 

Less noise there, if you please!” 


“I’ve caught a cold”, the Thing replies, 
“Out there upon the landing.” 

I turned to look in some surprise, 

And there, before my very eyes, 

A little Ghost was standing! 


He trembled when he caught my eye, 
And got behind a chair. 

“How came you here,” I said, “and why? 
I never saw a thing so shy. 

Come out! Don't shiver there!” 


74i 



VERSE 


He said “I’d gladly tell you how. 

And also tell you why; 

But” (here he gave a little bow) 
“You’re in so bad a temper now, 

You’d think it all a lie. 

"And as to being in a fright, 

Allow me to remark 
That Ghosts have just as good a right, 
In every way, to fear the light, 

As Men to fear the dark.” 

“No plea”, said I, “can well excuse 
Such cowardice in you: 

For Ghosts can visit when they choose, 
Whereas we Humans ca’n’t refuse 
To grant the interview.” 

He said “A flutter of alarm 
Is not unnatural, is it? 

I really feared you meant some harm: 
But, now I see that you are calm, 

Let me explain my visit. 

“Houses are classed, I beg to state, 
According to the number 
Of Ghosts that they accommodate: 
(The Tenant merely counts as weight, 
With Coals and other lumber). 

“This is a ‘one-ghost’ house, and you, 
When you arrived last summer, 
May have remarked a Spectre who 
Was doing all that Ghosts can do 
To welcome the new-comer. 

“In Villas this is always done— 
However cheaply rented: 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

For, though of course there’s less of fun 
When there is only room for one, 

Ghosts have to be contented. 

“That Spectre left you on the Third— 
Since then you’ve not been haunted: 
For, as he never sent us word, 

'Twas quite by accident we heard 
That any one was wanted. 

“A Spectre has first choice, by right, 

In filling up a vacancy; 

Then Phantom, Goblin, Elf, and Sprite— 
If all these fail them, they invite 

The nicest Ghoul that they can see. 

“The Spectres said the place was low, 
And that you kept bad wine: 

So, as a Phantom had to go, 

And I was first, of course, you know, 

I couldn’t well decline.’’ 

“No doubt”, said I, "they settled who 
Was fittest to be sent: 

Yet still to choose a brat like you, 

To haunt a man of forty-two, 

Was no great compliment!” 

“I’m not so young, Sir,” he replied, 

“As you might think. The fact is, 

In caverns by the water-side, 

And other places that I’ve tried, 

I’ve had a lot of practice: 

“But I have never taken yet 
A strict domestic part, 

And in my flurry I forget 
The Five Good Rules of Etiquette 
We have to know by heart.” 



My sympathies were warming fast 
Towards the little fellow: 

He was so utterly aghast 
At having found a Man at last, 

And looked so scared and yellow. 

"At least”, I said, “I’m glad to find 
A Ghost is not a dumb thing! 

But pray sit down: you’ll feel inclined 
(If, like myself, you have not dined) 

To take a snack of something: 

“Though, certainly, you don’t appear 
A thing to offer food to! 

And then I shall be glad to hear— 

If you will say them loud and clear— 

The Rules that you allude to.” 

“Thanks! You shall hear them by and by. 

This is a piece of luck!” 

“What may I offer you?” said I. 

“Well, since you are so kind, I’ll try 
A little bit of duck. 

“One slice! And may I ask you for 
Another drop of gravy? ” 

I sat and looked at him in awe, 

For certainly I never saw 

A thing so white and wavy. 

And still he seemed to grow more white. 
More vapoury, and wavier— 

Seen in the dim and flickering light, 

As he proceeded to recite 

His “Maxims of Behaviour”. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


745 


Canto II 
Hys Fyve Rules 

“ My First—but don’t suppose”, he said, 
“I’m setting you a riddle— 

Is—if your Victim be in bed, 

Don’t touch the curtains at his head, 

But take them in the middle, 

"And wave them slowly in and out. 
While drawing them asunder; 

And in a minute’s time, no doubt, 

He’ll raise his head and look about 
With eyes of wrath and wonder. 

“And here you must on no pretence 
Make the first observation. 

Wait for the Victim to commence: 

No Ghost of any common sense 
Begins a conversation. 

“If he should say ‘How came you here?’ 

(The way thatyow began, Sir), 

In such a case your course is clear— 

‘On the bat’s back, my little dear!’ 

Is the appropriate answer. 

"If after this he says no more, 

You’d best perhaps curtail your 
Exertions—go and shake the door, 

And then, if he begins to snore, 

You’ll know the thing’s a failure. 

“By day, if he should be alone— 

At home or on a walk— 



VERSE 


You merely give a hollow groan, 

To indicate the kind of tone 
In which you mean to talk. 

“But if you find him with his friends. 

The thing is rather harder. 

In such a case success depends 
On picking up some candle-ends, 

Or butter, in the larder. 

“With this you make a kind of slide 
(It answers best with suet), 

On which you must contrive to glide. 

And swing yourself from side to side— 
One soon learns how to do it. 

“The Second tells us what is right 
In ceremonious calls:— 

'First burn a blue or crimson light ' 

(A thing I quite forgot to-night), 

‘Then scratch the door or walls.’ ” 

I said “You’ll visit here no more, 

If you attempt the Guy. 

I’ll have no bonfires on my floor— 

And, as for scratching at the door, 

I’d like to see you try!” 

“The Third was written to protect 
The interests of the Victim, 

And tells us, as I recollect, 

To treat him with a grave respect, 

And not to contradict him.” 

“That’s plain”, said I, “as Tare and Tret, 
To any comprehension: 

I only wish some Ghosts I’ve met 
Would not so constantly forget 

The maxim that you mention!” 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


747 


"Perhaps”, he said, “you first transgressed 
The laws of hospitality: 

All Ghosts instinctively detest 
The Man that fails to treat his guest 
With proper cordiality. 


"If you address a Ghost as ‘Thing!’ 

Or strike him with a hatchet, 

He is permitted by the King 
To drop all formal parleying— 

And then you’re sure to catch it! 


"The Fourth prohibits trespassing 

Where other Ghosts are quartered: 
And those convicted of the thing 
(Unless when pardoned by the King) 
Must instantly be slaughtered. 


"That simply means ‘be cut up small’: 

Ghosts soon unite anew: 

The process scarcely hurts at all— 

Not more than whenyow’re what you call 
‘Cut up’ by a Review. 


"The Fifth is one you may prefer 
That I should quote entire:— 
The King must be addressed as 'Sir ’. 
This, from a simple courtier, 

Is all the Laws require: 


“But, should you wish to do the thing 
With out-and-out politeness , 

Accost him as 'My Goblin King!’ 

And always use, in answering, 

The phrase 'Your Royal Whiteness . T 




VERSE 


“I’m getting rather hoarse, I fear, 
After so much reciting: 

So, if you don’t object, my dear, 
We’ll try a glass of bitter beer— 

I think it looks inviting.” 


Canto III 
Scarmoges 

“And did you really walk”, said I, 

“On such a wretched night? 

I always fancied Ghosts could fly— 

If not exactly in the sky, 

Yet at a fairish height.” 

"It’s very well”, said he, “for Kings 
To soar above the earth: 

But Phantoms often find that wings— 

Like many other pleasant things— 

Cost more than they are worth. 

“Spectres of course are rich, and so 
Can buy them from the Elves: 

But we prefer to keep below— 

They’re stupid company, you know, 

For any but themselves: 

“For, though they claim to be exempt 
From pride, they treat a Phantom 

As something quite beneath contempt— 

Just as no Turkey ever dreamt 
Of noticing a Bantam.” 

“They seem too proud”, said I, “to go 
To houses such as mine. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

Pray, how did they contrive to know 
So quickly that ‘the place was low’, 

And that I ‘kept bad wine’ ? ” 

“Inspector Kobold came to you-’’ 

The little Ghost began. 

Here I broke in—“Inspector who? 
Inspecting Ghosts is something new! 
Explain yourself, my man!’’ 

“His name is Kobald,” said my guest: 

“One of the Spectre order: 

You’ll very often see him dressed 
In a yellow gown, a crimson vest, 

And a night-cap with a border. 

“He tried the Brocken business first, 

But caught a sort of chill; 

So came to England to be nursed, 

And here it took the form of thirst, 

Which he complains of still. 

“Port-wine, he says, when rich and sound, 
Warms his old bones like nectar: 

And as the inns, where it is found, 

Are his especial hunting-ground, 

We call him the Inn-Spectre.” 

I bore it—bore it like a man— 

This agonizing witticism! 

And nothing could be sweeter than 
My temper, till the Ghost began 

Some most provoking criticism. 

“Cooks need not be indulged in waste; 

Yet still you’d better teach them 
Dishes should have some sort of taste. 
Pray, why are all the cruets placed 
Where nobody can reach them? 



VERSE 


“That man of yours will never earn 
His living as a waiter! 

Is that queer thing supposed to burn? 

(It’s far too dismal a concern 
To call a Moderator.) 

“The duck was tender, but the peas 
Were very much too old: 

And just remember, if you please, 

The next time you have toasted cheese, 
Don’t let them send it cold. 

“You’ll find the bread improved, I think, 
By getting better flour: 

And have you anything to drink 

That looks a little less like ink, 

And isn't quite so sour? ” 

Then, peering round with curious eyes, 
He muttered “Goodness gracious!” 

And so went on to criticize— 

“Your room’s an inconvenient size: 

It’s neither snug nor spacious. 

“That narrow window, I expect, 

Serves but to let the dusk in-” 

“But please”, said I, “to recollect 

'Twas fashioned by an architect 

Who pinned his faith on Ruskin!” 

“I don’t care who he was. Sir, or 
On whom he pinned his faith! 

Constructed by whatever law, 

So poor a job I never saw, 

As I’m a living Wraith! 

“What a re-markable cigar! 

How much are they a dozen?” 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

I.growled “No matter what they are! 

You’re getting as familiar 

As if you were my cousin! 

“Now that’s a thing I will not stand , 
And so I tell you flat.” 

“Aha,” said he, “we’re getting grand!” 

(Taking a bottle in his hand) 

“I’ll soon arrange for that\” 

And here he took a careful aim, 

And gaily cried “Here goes!” 

I tried to dodge it as it came, 

But somehow caught it, all the same, 
Exactly on my nose. 

And I remember nothing more 
That I can clearly fix, 

Till I was sitting on the floor, 

Repeating “Two and five are four. 

But five and two are six.” 

What really passed I never learned, 
Nor guessed: I only know 

That, when at last my sense returned, 

The lamp, neglected, dimly burned— 
The fire was getting low— 

Through driving mists I seemed to see 
A Thing that smirked and smiled: 

And found that he was giving me 

A lesson in Biography, 

As if I were a child. 



752 


VERSE 


Canto IV 
Hys Nouryture 

“Oh, when I was a little Ghost, 

A merry time had we! 

Each seated on his favourite post, 

We chumped and chawed the buttered toast 
They gave us for our tea.” 

“That story is in print!” I cried 
“Don’t say it’s not, because 

It’s known as well as Bradshaw’s Guide!” 

(The Ghost uneasily replied 
He hardly thought it was.) 

“It's not in Nursery Rhymes? And yet 
I almost think it is— 

‘Three little Ghosteses' were set 

‘On posteses’, you know, and ate 
Their ‘buttered toasteses'. 

“I have the book; so if you doubt it-” 

I turned to search the shelf. 

“Don’t stir!” he cried. “We’ll do without it 

I now remember all about it; 

I wrote the thing myself. 

“It came out in a ‘Monthly’, or 
At least my agent said it did: 

Some literary swell, who saw 

It, thought it seemed adapted for 
The Magazine he edited. 

“My father was a Brownie, Sir; 

My mother was a Fairy. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

The notion had occurred to her, 

The children would be happier, 

If they were taught to vary. 

“The notion soon became a craze; 

And, when it once began, she 
Brought us all out in different ways— 

One was a Pixy, two were Fays, 

Another was a Banshee; 

“The Fetch and Kelpie went to school 
And gave a lot of trouble; 

Next came a Poltergeist and Ghoul, 

And then two Trolls (which broke the rule), 
A Goblin, and a Double— 

“(If that’s a snuff-box on the shelf,” 

He added with a yawn, 

“I’ll take a pinch)—next came an Elf, 

And then a Phantom (that’s myself), 

And last, a Leprechaun. 

“One day, some Spectres chanced to call, 
Dressed in the usual white: 

I stood and watched them in the hall, 

And couldn’t make them out at all, 

They seemed so strange a sight. 

“I wondered what on earth they were. 

That looked all head and sack; 

But Mother told me not to stare, 

And then she twitched me by the hair, 

And punched me in the back. 

“Since then I’ve often wished that I 
Had been a Spectre born. 

But what’s the use?” (He heaved a sigh.) 

“They are the ghost-nobility, 

And look on us with scorn. 



VERSE 


“My phantom-life was soon begun: 

When I was barely six, 

I went out with an older one— 

And just at first I thought it fun, 

And learned a lot of tricks. 

“I’ve haunted dungeons, castles, towers— 
Wherever I was sent: 

I’ve often sat and howled for hours, 

Drenched to the skin with driving showers, 
Upon a battlement. 

“It’s quite old-fashioned now to groan 
When you begin to speak: 

This is the newest thing in tone-” 

And here (it chilled me to the bone) 

He gave an awful squeak. 

“Perhaps”, he added, “toyour ear 
That sounds an easy thing? 

Try it yourself, my little dear! 

It took me something like a year, 

With constant practising. 

“And when you’ve learned to squeak, my man, 
And caught the double sob, 

You’re pretty much where you began: 

Just try and gibber if you can! 

That’s something like a job! 

“I’ve tried it, and can only say 
I’m sure you couldn’t do it, e- 
ven if you practised night and day, 

Unless you have a turn that way, 

And natural ingenuity. 

“Shakespeare I think it is who treats 
Of Ghosts, in days of old, 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

Who ‘gibbered in the Roman streets’, 
Dressed, if you recollect, in sheets— 

They must have found it cold. 

“Fve often spent ten pounds on stuff, 

In dressing as a Double; 

But, though it answers as a puff. 

It never has effect enough 

To make it worth the trouble. 

“Long bills soon quenched the little thirst 
I had for being funny. 

The setting-up is always worst: 

Such heaps of things you want at first, 
One must be made of money! 

“For instance, take a Haunted Tower, 
With skull, cross-bones, and sheet; 
Blue lights to burn (say) two an hour, 
Condensing lens of extra power, 

And set of chains complete: 

“What with the things you have to hire— 
The fitting on the robe— 

And testing all the coloured fire— 

The outfit of itself would tire 
The patience of a Job! 

“And then they’re so fastidious, 

The Haunted-House Committee: 

I’ve often known them make a fuss 
Because a Ghost was French, or Russ, 

Or even from the City! 

“Some dialects are objected to— 

For one, the Irish brogue is: 

And then, for all you have to do, 

One pound a week they offer you. 

And find yourself in Bogies!’’ 



756 


VERSE 


Canto V 
Byckerment 

“Don’t they consult the ‘Victims’, though?’’ 

I said. “They should, by rights, 

Give them a chance—because, you know. 

The tastes of people differ so, 

Especially in Sprites.” 

The Phantom shook his head and smiled. 

“Consult them? Not a bit! 

'Twould be a job to drive one wild, 

To satisfy one single child— 

There’d be no end to it!” 

“Of course you ca’n’t leave children free”, 

Said I, “ to pick and choose: 

But, in the case of men like me, 

I think ‘Mine Host’ might fairly be 
Allowed to state his views.” 

He said “It really wouldn’t pay— 

Folk are so full of fancies. 

We visit for a single day, 

And whether then we go, or stay, 

Depends on circumstances. 

“And, though we don’t consult ‘Mine Host’ 
Before the thing’s arranged, 

Still, if he often quits his post, 

Or is not a well-mannered Ghost, 

Then you can have him changed. 

“But if the host’s a man like you— 

I mean a man of sense; 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


And if the house is not too new-” 

“Why, what has that”, said I, “to do 
With Ghost’s convenience?’’ 

“A new house does not suit, you know— 
It’s such a job to trim it: 

But, after twenty years or so, 

The wainscotings begin to go, 

So twenty is the limit.” 

“To trim” was not a phrase I could 
Remember having heard: 

“Perhaps”, I said, “you’ll be so good 
As tell me what is understood 
Exactly by that word?” 

“It means the loosening all the doors,” 
The Ghost replied, and laughed: 

“It means the drilling holes by scores 
In all the skirting-boards and floors, 

To make a thorough draught. 

“You’ll sometimes find that one or two 
Are all you really need 
To let the wind come whistling through— 
But here there’ll be a lot to do!” 

I faintly gasped “Indeed! 

“If I’d been rather later. I’ll 
Be bound,” I added, trying 
(Most unsuccessfully) to smile, 

“You’d have been busy all this while, 
Trimming and beautifying?” 

“Why, no,” said he; “perhaps I should 
Have stayed another minute— 

But still no Ghost, that’s any good. 
Without an introduction would 
Have ventured to begin it. 



VERSE 


“The proper thing, as you were late, 

Was certainly to go: 

But, with the roads in such a state, 

I got the Knight-Mayor’s leave to wait 
For half an hour or so.’’ 

“Who’s the Knight-Mayor?” I cried. Instead 
Of answering my question, 

“Well, if you don’t know that,” he said, 
“Either you never go to bed, 

Or you’ve a grand digestion! 

“He goes about and sits on folk 
That eat too much at night: 

His duties are to pinch, and poke, 

And squeeze them till they nearly choke.” 

(I said “It serves them right!”) 

“And folk who sup on things like these—” 

He muttered, “eggs and bacon— 
Lobster—and duck—and toasted cheese— 

If they don’t get an awful squeeze, 

I’m very much mistaken! 

“He is immensely fat, and so 
Well suits the occupation: 

In point of fact, if you must know, 

We used to call him years ago, 

The Mayor and Corporation! 

“The day he was elected Mayor 

I know that every Sprite meant 
To vote for me, but did not dare— 

He was so frantic with despair 
And furious with excitement. 

“When it was over, for a whim, 

He ran to tell the King; 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


759 


And being the reverse of slim, 

A two-mile trot was not for him 
A very easy thing. 

“So, to reward him for his run 
(As it was baking hot, 

And he was over twenty stone), 

The King proceeded, half in fun, 

To knight him on the spot.” 

“ 'Twas a great liberty to take!” 

(I fired up like a rocket.) 

“He did it just for punning’s sake: 

‘The man’, says Johnson, ‘that would make 
A pun, would pick a pocket!’ ” 

“A man”, said he, “is not a King.” 

I argued for a while, 

And did my best to prove the thing— 

The Phantom merely listening 
With a contemptuous smile. 

At last, when, breath and patience spent, 

I had recourse to smoking— 

"Your aim ”, he said, “is excellent: 

But—when you call it argument — 

Of course you’re only joking?” 

Stung by his cold and snaky eye, 

I roused myself at length 
To say, “At least I do defy 
The veriest sceptic to deny 
That union is strength!” 

“That’s true enough,” said he, “yet stay—” 
I listened in all meekness— 

"Union is strength, I'm bound to say; 

In fact, the thing’s as clear as day; 

But onions are a weakness.” 



760 


VERSE 


Canto VI 
Discomfyture 

A s one who strives a hill to climb, 

Who never climbed before: 

Who finds it, in a little time, 

Grow every moment less sublime, 

And votes the thing a bore: 

1 

Yet, having once begun to try, 

Dares not desert his quest, 

But, climbing, ever keeps his eye 
On one small hut against the sky 
Wherein he hopes to rest: 

Who climbs till nerve and force are spent, 
With many a puff and pant: 

Who still, as rises the ascent, 

In language grows more violent. 
Although in breath more scant: 

Who, climbing, gains at length the place 
That crowns the upward track: 

And, entering with unsteady pace, 
Receives a buffet in the face 
That lands him on his back: 

And feels himself, like one in sleep, 

Glide swiftly down again, 

A helpless weight, from steep to steep, 
Till, with a headlong giddy sweep, 

He drops upon the plain— 

So I, that had resolved to bring 
Conviction to a ghost, 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

And found it quite a different thing 
From any human arguing, 

Yet dared not quit my post. 

But, keeping still the end in view 
To which I hoped to come, 

I strove to prove the matter true 
By putting everything I knew 
Into an axiom: 

Commencing every single phrase 
With “therefore” or “because” 

I blindly reeled, a hundred ways, 

About the syllogistic maze, 

Unconscious where I was. 

Quoth he “That’s regular clap-trap: 

Don’t bluster any more. 

Now do be cool and take a nap! 

Such a ridiculous old chap 
Was never seen before! 

“You’re like a man I used to meet, 

Who got one day so furious 
In arguing, the simple heat 
Scorched both his slippers off his feet!’’ 

I said “That's very curious /" 

“Well, it is curious, I agree. 

And sounds perhaps like fibs: 

But still it’s true as true can be— 

As sure as your name's Tibbs,” said he. 

I said “My name's not Tibbs.” 

“Not Tibbs!” he cried—his tone became 
A shade or two less hearty— 

“Why, no,” said I. “My proper name 
Is Tibbets—” “Tibbets?” “Aye, the same." 
“Why, then you’re not the party!” 



762 


VERSE 


With that he struck the board a blow 
That shivered half the glasses. 

“Why couldn’t you have told me so 
Three quarters of an hour ago, 

You prince of all the asses? 

“To walk four miles through mud and rain, 
To spend the night in smoking, 

And then to find that it’s in vain— 

And I've to do it all again— 

It’s really too provoking! 

“Don’t talk!’’ he cried, as I began 
To mutter some excuse. 

“Who can have patience with a man 
That’s got no more discretion than 
An idiotic goose? 

“To keep me waiting here, instead 
Of telling me at once 
That this was not the house!” he said. 
“There, that’ll do—be off to bed! 

Don’t gape like that, you dunce!” 

“It's very fine to throw the blame 
On me in such a fashion! 

Why didn't you enquire my name 
The very minute that you came?” 

I answered in a passion. 

“Of course it worries you a bit 
To come so far on foot— 

But how was 1 to blame for it?” 

“Well, well!” said he. “I must admit 
That isn’t badly put. 

“And certainly you’ve given me 
The best of wine and victual— 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

Excuse my violence,” said he, 

“But accidents like this, you see, 

They put one out a little. 

“ 'Twas my fault after all, I find— 

Shake hands, old Turnip-top!” 

The name was hardly to my mind, 

But, as no doubt he meant it kind, 

I let the matter drop. 

“Good-night, old Turnip-top, good-night! 

When I am gone, perhaps 
They’ll send'you some inferior Sprite, 
Who’ll keep you in a constant fright 
And spoil your soundest naps. 

“Tell him you’ll stand no sort of trick; 

Then, if he leers and chuckles, 

You just be handy with a stick 
(Mind that it’s pretty hard and thick) 

And rap him on the knuckles! 

“Then carelessly remark ‘Old coon! 

Perhaps you’re not aware 
That if you don’t behave, you’ll soon 
Be chuckling to another tune— 

And so you’d best take care!’ 

“That’s the right way to cure a Sprite 
Of such-like goings-on— 

But gracious me! It’s getting light! 
Good-night, old Turnip-top, good-night!” 
A nod, and he was gone. 



76 4 


VERSE 


Canto VII 
Sad Souvenaunce 

“What’s this?” I pondered. “Have I slept? 

Or can I have been drinking?” 

But soon a gentler feeling crept 
Upon me, and I sat and wept 
An hour or so, like winking. 

“No need for Bones to hurry so!” 

I sobbed. “In fact, I doubt 
If it was worth his while to go— 

And who is Tibbs, I'd like to know, 

To make such work about ? 

“If Tibbs is anything like me, 

It’s possible”, I said, 

“He won’t be over-pleased to be 
Dropped in upon at half-past three, 

After he’s snug in bed. 

"And if Bones plagues him anyhow— 
Squeaking and all the rest of it, 

As he was doing here just now— 

I prophesy there’ll be a row, 

And Tibbs will have the best of it!” 

Then, as my tears could never bring 
The friendly Phantom back, 

It seemed to me the proper thing 
To mix another glass, and sing 
The following Coronach. 

And art thou gone, beloved Ghost? 

Best of Familiars! 



phantasmagoria 


765 


Nay, then, farewell, my duckling roast, 
Farewell, farewell, my tea and toast, 
My meerschaum and cigars! 

The hues of life are dull and gray, 

The sweets of life insipid, 

When thou, my charmer, art away — 
Old Brick, or rather, let me say, 

Old Parallelepiped!” 

Instead of singing Verse the Third, 

I ceased—abruptly, rather: 

But, after such a splendid word 
I felt that it would be absurd 
To try it any farther. 


So with a yawn I went my way 
To seek the welcome downy, 

And slept, and dreamed till break of day 
Of Poltergeist and Fetch and Fay 
And Leprechaun and Brownie! 

For years I’ve not been visited 
By any kind of Sprite; 

Yet still they echo in my head, 

Those parting words, so kindly said, 
“Old Turnip-top, good-night!” 


ECHOES 

LADYClaraV ere de V ere 
Was eight years old, she said: 

Every ringlet, lightly shaken, ran itself in golden thread. 



VERSE 


766 

She took her little porringer: 

Of me she shall not win renown: 

For the baseness of its nature shall have strength to drag 
her down. 

“Sisters and brothers, little Maid? 

There stands the Inspector at thy door: 

Like a dog, he hunts for boys who know not two and two 
are four.” 

“Kind hearts are more than coronets,” 

She said, and wondering looked at me: 

“It is the dead unhappy night, and I must hurry home to 
tea.” 


A SEA DIRGE 

There are certain things—as, a spider, a ghost, 
The income-tax, gout, an umbrella for three— 
That I hate, but the thing that I hate the most 
Is a thing they call the Sea. 

Pour some salt water over the floor— 

Ugly I’m sure you'll allow it to be: 

Suppose it extended a mile or more, 

That’s very like the Sea. 

Beat a dog till it howls outright— 

Cruel, but all very well for a spree: 

Suppose that he did so day and night, 

That would be like the Sea. 

I had a vision of nursery-maids; 

Tens of thousands passed by me— 

All leading children with wooden spades, 

And this was by the Sea. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


767 


Who invented those spades of wood? 

Who was it cut them out of the tree? 

None, I think, but an idiot could— 

Or one that loved the Sea. 

It is pleasant and dreamy, no doubt, to float 
With “thoughts as boundless, and souls as free”: 

But, suppose you are very unwell in the boat, 

How do you like the Sea? 

There is an insect that people avoid 
(Whence is derived the verb “to flee”). 

Where have you been by it most annoyed? 

In lodgings by the Sea. 

If you like your coffee with sand for dregs, 

A decided hint of salt in your tea, 

And a fishy taste in the very eggs— 

By all means choose the Sea. 

And if, with these dainties to drink and eat, 

You prefer not a vestige of grass or tree. 

And a chronic state of wet in your feet, 

Then—I recommend the Sea. 

For I have friends who dwell by the coast—- 
Pleasant friends they are to me! 

It is when I am with them I wonder most 
That anyone likes the Sea. 

They take me a walk: though tired and stiff. 

To climb the heights I madly agree; 

And, after a tumble or so from the cliff, 

They kindly suggest the Sea. 

I try the rocks, and I think it cool 
That they laugh with such an excess of glee. 

As I heavily slip into every pool 

That skirts the cold cold Sea. 



768 


VERSE 


YE CARPETTE KNYGHTE 

I have a horse—a ryghte goode horse— 

Ne doe I envye those 
Who scoure ye playne yn headye course 
Tyll soddayne on theyre nose 
They lyghte wyth unexpected force 
Yt ys—a horse of clothes. 

I have a saddel—“Say'st thou soe? 

Wyth styrruppes, Knyghte, to boote?” 
I sayde not that—I answere “Noe”— 

Yt lacketh such, I woote: 

Yt ys a mutton-saddel, loe! 

Parte of ye fleecye brute. 

I have a bytte—a ryghte good bytte— 

As shall bee seene yn tyme. 

Ye jawe of horse yt wyll not fytte; 

Yts use ys more sublyme. 

Fayre Syr, how deemest thou of yt? 

Yt ys—thys bytte of rhyme. 


HIAWATHA’S PHOTOGRAPHING 

[In an age of imitation, I can claim no special merit for 
this slight attempt at doing what is known to be so easy. 
Any fairly practised writer, with the slightest ear for rhythm, 
could compose, for hours together, in the easy running 
metre of “The Song of Hiawatha". Having, then, distinctly 
stated that I challenge no attention in the following little 
poem to its merely verbal jingle, I must beg the candid 
reader to confine his criticism to its treatment of the sub¬ 
ject.] 

From his shoulder Hiawatha 
Took the camera of rosewood, 

Made of sliding, folding rosewood; 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

Neatly put it all together. 

In its case it lay compactly,. 

Folded into nearly nothing; 

But he opened out the hinges, 

Pushed and pulled the joints and hinges, 
Till it looked all squares and oblongs, 
Like a complicated figure 
In the Second Book of Euclid. 

This he perched upon a tripod— 
Crouched beneath its dusky cover— 
Stretched his hand, enforcing silence— 
Said, “Be motionless, I beg you!” 
Mystic, awful was the process. 

All the family in order 
Sat before him for their pictures: 

Each in turn as he was taken, 
Volunteered his own suggestions, 

His ingenious suggestions. 

First the Governor, the Father: 

He suggested velvet curtains 
Looped about a massy pillar; 

And the corner of a table, 

Of a rosewood dining-table. 

He would hold a scroll of something, 
Hold it firmly in his left-hand; 

He would keep his right-hand buried 
(Like Napoleon) in his waistcoat; 

He would contemplate the distance 
With a look of pensive meaning, 

As of ducks that die in tempests. 

Grand, heroic was the notion: 

Yet the picture failed entirely: 

Failed, because he moved a little, 
Moved, because he couldn’t help it. 

Next, his better half took courage; 

She would have her picture taken. 

She came dressed beyond description, 
Dressed in jewels and in satin 



VERSE 


Far too gorgeous for an empress. 
Gracefully she sat down sideways, 
With a simper scarcely human, 
Holding in her hand a bouquet 
Rather larger than a cabbage. 

All the while that she was sitting, 

Still the lady chattered, chattered, 
Like a monkey in the forest. 

“Am I sitting still?” she asked him. 
“Is my face enough in profile? 

Shall I hold the bouquet higher? 

Will it come into the picture?” 

And the picture failed completely. 

Next the Son, the Stunning-Cantab: 
He suggested curves of beauty, 

Curves pervading all his figure, 

Which the eye might follow onward, 
Till they centred in the breast-pin, 
Centred in the golden breast-pin. 

He had learnt it all from Ruskin 
(Author of “The Stones of Venice”, 
“Seven Lamps of Architecture”, 
“Modern Painters”, and some others); 
And perhaps he had not fully 
Understood his author’s meaning; 

But, whatever was the reason, 

All was fruitless, as the picture 
Ended in an utter failure. 

Next to him the eldest daughter: 

She suggested very little. 

Only asked if he would take her 
With her look of “passive beauty”. 

Her idea of passive beauty 
Was a squinting of the left-eye, 

Was a drooping of the right-eye, 

Was a smile that went up sideways 
To the corner of the nostrils. 
Hiawatha, when she asked him, 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

Took no notice of the question, 

Looked as if he hadn’t heard it; 

But, when pointedly appealed to, 

Smiled in his peculiar manner, 

Coughed and said it “didn’t matter”, 

Bit his lip and changed the subject. 

Nor in this was he mistaken, 

As the picture failed completely. 

So in turn the other sisters. 

Last, the youngest son was taken: 

Very rough and thick his hair was, 

Very round and red his face was, 

Very dusty was his jacket, 

Very fidgety his manner. 

And his overbearing sisters 
Called him names he disapproved of: 
Called him Johnny, “Daddy’s Darling”, 
Called him Jacky, “Scrubby School-boy”. 
And, so awful was the picture, 

In comparison the others 
Seemed, to one’s bewildered fancy, 

To have partially succeeded. 

Finally my Hiawatha 
Tumbled all the tribe together, 
(“Grouped” is not the right expression), 
And, as happy chance would have it 
Did at last obtain a picture 
Where the faces all succeeded: 

Each came out a perfect likeness. 

Then they joined and all abused it. 
Unrestrainedly abused it, 

As the worst and ugliest picture 
They could possibly have dreamed of. 
“Giving one such strange expressions— 
Sullen, stupid, pert expressions. 

Really anyone would take us 
(Anyone that did not know us) 

For the most unpleasant people!” 



VERSE 


(Hiawatha seemed to think so. 
Seemed to think it not unlikely.) 
All together rang their voices, 
Angry, loud, discordant voices, 

As of dogs that howl in concert, 

As of cats that wail in chorus. 

But my Hiawatha’s patience, 
His politeness and his patience, 
Unaccountably had vanished, 

And he left that happy party. 
Neither did he leave them slowly, 
With the calm deliberation, 

The intense deliberation 
Of a photographic artist: 

But he left them in a hurry, 

Left them in a mighty hurry, 
Stating that he would not stand it, 
Stating in emphatic language 
What he’d be before he’d stand it. 
Hurriedly he packed his boxes: 
Hurriedly the porter trundled 
On a barrow all his boxes: 
Hurriedly he took his ticket: 
Hurriedly the train received him: 
Thus departed Hiawatha. 


MELANCHOLETTA 

With saddest music all day long 
She soothed her secret sorrow: 

At night she sighed “I fear ’twas wrong 
Such cheerful words to borrow. 
Dearest, a sweeter, sadder song 
I’ll sing to thee to-morrow.” 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

I thanked her, but I could not say 
That I was glad to hear it: 

I left the house at break of day, 

And did not venture near it 

Till time, I hoped, had worn away 
Her grief, for nought could cheer it! 

My dismal sister! Couldst thou know 
The wretched home thou keepest! 

Thy brother, drowned in daily woe, 

Is thankful when thou sleepest; 

For if I laugh, however low, 

When thou’rt awake, thou weepest! 

I took my sister t’other day 
(Excuse the slang expression) 

To Sadler’s Wells to see the play 
In hopes the new impression 

Might in her thoughts, from grave to gay 
Effect some slight digression. 

I asked three gay young dogs from town 
To join us in our folly. 

Whose mirth, I thought, might serve to drown 
My sister’s melancholy: 

The lively Jones, the sportive Brown, 

And Robinson the jolly. 

The maid announced the meal in tones 
That I myself had taught her, 

Meant to allay my sister’s moans 
Like oil on troubled water: 

I rushed to Jones, the lively Jones, 

And begged him to escort her. 

Vainly he strove, with ready wit. 

To joke about the weather— 

To ventilate the last “on dit ”— 



774 


VERSE 


To quote the price of leather— 

She groaned “Here I and Sorrow sit: 

Let us lament together!” 

I urged “You’re wasting time, you know: 

Delay will spoil the venison.” 

"My heart is wasted with my woe! 

There is no rest—in Venice, on 
The Bridge of Sighs! ” she quoted low 
From Byron and from Tennyson. 

I need not tell of soup and fish 
In solemn silence swallowed, 

The sobs that ushered in each dish, 

And its departure followed, 

Nor yet my suicidal wish 
To be the cheese I hollow r ed. 

Some desperate attempts were made 
To start a conversation; 

“Madam,” the sportive Brown essayed, 
“Which kind of recreation, 

Hunting or fishing, have you made 
Your special occupation ? ’ ’ 

Her lips curved downwards instantly, 

As if of india-rubber. 

“Hounds in full cry I like,” said she: 

(Oh, how I longed to snub her!) 

“Of fish, a whale’s the one for me, 

It is so full of blubber!” 

The night’s performance was "King John”. 

"It’s dull”, she wept, “and so-so!” 
Awhile I let her tears flow on, 

She said they soothed her woe so! 

At length the curtain rose upon 
"Bombastes Furioso”. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


775 


In vain we roared; in vain we tried 
To rouse her into laughter: 

Her pensive glances wandered wide 
From orchestra to rafter— 

"Tier upon tier\” she said, and sighed; 
And silence followed after. 


A VALENTINE 

[Sent to a friend who had complained that I was glad 
enough to see him when he came, but didn’t seem to miss 
him if he stayed away.] 

And cannot pleasures, while they last. 

Be actual unless, when past, 

They leave us shuddering and aghast, 

With anguish smarting? 

And cannot friends be firm and fast, 

And yet bear parting? 

And must I then, at Friendship’s call. 

Calmly resign the little all 
(Trifling, I grant, it is and small) 

I have of gladness, 

And lend my being to the thrall 
Of gloom and sadness? 

And think you that I should be dumb. 

And full dolorutn omnium. 

Excepting when you choose to come 
And share my dinner? 

At other times be sour and glum 
And daily thinner? 

Must he then only live to weep, 

Who’d prove his friendship true and deep. 



VERSE 


By day a lonely shadow creep, 

At night-time languish, 

Oft raising in his broken sleep 
The moan of anguish? 

The lover, if for certain days 
His fair one be denied his gaze, 

Sinks not in grief and wild amaze, 

But, wiser wooer, 

He spends the time in writing lays, 

And posts them to her. 

And if the verse flow free and fast. 

Till even the poet is aghast, 

A touching Valentine at last 
The post shall carry, 

When thirteen days are gone and past 
Of February. 

Farewell, dear friend, and when we meet, 
In desert waste or crowded street, 
Perhaps before this week shall fleet, 
Perhaps to-morrow, 

I trust to find your heart the seat 
Of wasting sorrow. 


THE THREE VOICES 

The First Voice 

H e trilled a carol fresh and free, 

He laughed aloud for very glee: 

There came a breeze from off the sea: 

It passed athwart the glooming flat— 
It fanned his forehead as he sat— 

It lightly bore away his hat. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


777 


All to the feet of one who stood 
Like maid enchanted in a wood, 

Frowning as darkly as she could. 

With huge umbrella, lank and brown, 
Unerringly she pinned it down, 

Right through the centre of the crown. 

Then, with an aspect cold and grim, 
Regardless of its battered rim, 

She took it up and gave it him. 

A while like one in dreams he stood, 

Then faltered forth his gratitude 
In words just short of being rude: 

For it had lost its shape and shine. 

And it had cost him four-and-nine. 

And he was going out to dine. 

“To dine!” she sneered in acid tone 
“To bend thy being to a bone 
Clothed in a radiance not its own!'" 

The tear-drop trickled to his chin: 

There was a meaning in her grin 
That made him feel on fire within. 

“Term it not ‘radiance’,” said he: 

“ ’Tis solid nutriment to me. 

Dinner is Dinner: Tea is Tea.” 

And she, “Yea so? Yet wherefore cease? 

Let thy scant knowledge find increase. 

Say ‘Men are Men, and Geese are Geese’.” 

He moaned: he knew not what to say. 

The thought “That I could get away!” 
Strove with the thought “But I must stay”. 



778 


VERSE 


"To dine!" she shrieked in dragon-wrath. 
"To swallow wines all foam and froth! 

To simper at a table-cloth! 

"Say, can thy noble spirit stoop 
To join the gormandizing troop 
Who find a solace in the soup? 

“Canst thou desire or pie or puff? 

Thy well-bred manners were enough, 
Without such gross material stuff.” 

"Yet well-bred men", he faintly said, 
"Are not unwilling to be fed: 

Nor are they well without the bread.” 

Her visage scorched him ere she spoke: 
"There are", she said, “a kind of folk 
Who have no horror of a joke. 

"Such wretches live: they take their share 
Of common earth and common air: 

We come across them here and there: 

"We grant them—there is no escape— 

A sort of semi-human shape 
Suggestive of the man-like Ape.” 

"In all such theories”, said he, 

"One fixed exception there must be. 

That is, the Present Company.” 

Baffled, she gave a wolfish bark: 

He, aiming blindly in the dark, 

With random shaft had pierced the mark. 

She felt that her defeat was plain, 

Yet madly strove with might and main 
To get the upper hand again. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

Fixing her eyes upon the beach, 

As though unconscious of his speech, 

She said “Each gives to more than each”. 

He could not answer yea or nay: 

He faltered “Gifts may pass away”. 

Yet knew not what he meant to say. 

“If that be so,” she straight replied, 

“Each heart with each doth coincide. 

What boots it? For the world is wide.” 

“The world is but a Thought,” said he: 

“The vast unfathomable sea 
Is but a Notion—unto me.” 

And darkly fell her answer dread 
Upon his unresisting head, 

Like half a hundredweight of lead. 

“The Good and Great must ever shun 
That reckless and abandoned one 
Who stoops to perpetrate a pun. 

“The man that smokes—that reads The Times- 
That goes to Christmas Pantomimes— 

Is capable of any crimes!” 

He felt it was his turn to speak, 

And, with a shamed and crimson cheek, 
Moaned “This is harder than Bezique!” 

But when she asked him “Wherefore so?” 

He felt his very whiskers glow, 

And frankly owned “I do not know”. 

While, like broad waves of golden grain, 

Or sunlit hues on cloistered pane, 

His colour came and went again. 



780 


VERSE 


Pitying his obvious distress, 

Yet with a tinge of bitterness, 

She said “The More exceeds the Less”. 

“A truth of such undoubted weight”, 
He urged, “and so extreme in date, 

It were superfluous to state.” 

Roused into sudden passion, she 
In tone of cold malignity: 

“To others, yea: but not to thee.” 

But when she saw him quail and quake, 
And when he urged “For pity's sake!” 
Once more in gentle tones she spake. 

“Thought in the mind doth still abide 
That is by Intellect supplied, 

And within that Idea doth hide: 

“And he, that yearns the truth to know 
Still further inwardly may go, 

And find Idea from Notion flow: 

“And thus the chain, that sages sought, 
Is to a glorious circle wrought, 

For Notion hath its source in Thought.” 

So passed they on with even pace: 

Yet gradually one might trace 
A shadow growing on his face. 


The Second Voice 

They walked beside the wave-worn beach; 
Her tongue was very apt to teach, 

And now and then he did beseech 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


781 


She would abate her dulcet tone, 

Because the talk was all her own, 

And he was dull as any drone. 

She urged “No cheese is made of chalk’': 

And ceaseless flowed her dreary talk. 

Tuned to the footfall of a walk. 

Her voice was very full and rich, 

And, when at length she asked him “Which?” 

It mounted to its highest pitch. 

He a bewildered answer gave, 

Drowned in the sullen moaning wave, 

Lost in the echoes of the cave. 

He answered her he knew not what: 

Like shaft from bow at random shot, 

He spoke, but she regarded not. 

She waited not for his reply, 

But with a downward leaden eye 
Went on as if he were not by— 

Sound argument and grave defence, 

Strange questions raised on “Why?” and “Whence?” 
And wildly tangled evidence. 

When he, with racked and whirling brain, 

Feebly implored her to explain, 

She simply said it all again. 

Wrenched with an agony intense, 

He spake, neglecting Sound and Sense, 

And careless of all consequence: 

“Mind—I believe—is Essence—Ent— 

Abstract—that is—an Accident— 

Which we—that is to say—I meant-” 



VERSE 


When, with quick breath and cheeks all flushed, 
At length his speech was somewhat hushed, 

She looked at him, and he was crushed. 

It needed not her calm reply: 

She fixed him with a stony eye, 

And he could neither fight nor fly. 

While she dissected, word by word, 

His speech, half-guessed at and half-heard, 

As might a cat a little bird. 

Then, having wholly overthrown 

His views, and stripped them to the bone, 

Proceeded to unfold her own. 

“Shall Man be Man? And shall he miss 
Of other thoughts no thought but this, 
Harmonious dews of sober bliss? 

“What boots it? Shall his fevered eye 
Through towering nothingness descry 
The grisly phantom hurry by? 

“And hear dumb shrieks that fill the air: 

See mouths that gape, and eyes that stare 
And redden in the dusky glare ? 

“The meadows breathing amber light, 

The darkness toppling from the height, 

The feathery train of granite Night? 

“Shall he, grown gray among his peers. 

Through the thick curtain of his tears 
Catch glimpses of his earlier years, 

“And hear the sounds he knew of yore, 

Old shufflings on the sanded floor. 

Old knuckles tapping at the door? 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

'‘Yet still before him as he flies 
One pallid form shall ever rise, 

And, bodying forth in glassy eyes 

"The vision of a vanished good, 

Low peering through the tangled wood. 
Shall freeze the current of his blood." 

Still from each fact, with skill uncouth 

And savage rapture, like a tooth 

She wrenched some slow reluctant truth. 

Till, like a silent water-mill, 

When summer suns have dried the rill, 
She reached a full stop, and was still. 

Dead calm succeeded to the fuss, 

As when the loaded omnibus 
Has reached the railway terminus: 

When, for the tumult of the street, 

Is heard the engine’s stifled beat, 

The velvet tread of porters' feet. 

With glance that ever sought the ground, 
She moved her lips without a sound. 

And every now and then she frowned. 

He gazed upon the sleeping sea, 

And joyed in its tranquillity, 

And in that silence dead, but she 

To muse a little space did seem, 

Then, like the echo of a dream, 

Harked back upon her threadbare theme. 

Still an attentive ear he lent 

But could not fathom what she meant: 

She was not deep, nor eloquent. 



784 


VERSE 


He marked the ripple on the sand: 

The even swaying of her hand 
Was all that he could understand. 

He saw in dreams a drawing-room, 

Where thirteen wretches sat in gloom, 

Waiting—he thought he knew for whom: 

He saw them drooping here and there, 

Each feebly huddled on a chair, 

In attitudes of blank despair: 

Oysters were not more mute than they, 

For all their brains were pumped away, 

And they had nothing more to say— 

Save one, who groaned “Three hours are gone!” 
Who shrieked “We’ll wait no longer, John! 

Tell them to set the dinner on!” 

The vision passed: the ghosts were fled: 

He saw once more that woman dread: 

He heard once more the words she said. 

He left her, and he turned aside: 

He sat and watched the coming tide 
Across the shores so newly dried. 

He wondered at the waters clear, 

The breeze that whispered in his f ar, 

The billows heaving far and near. 

And why he had so long preferred 
To hang upon her every word: 

“In truth”, he said, “it was absurd.” 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


7 8 5 


The Third Voice 

Not long this transport held its place: 

Within a little moment’s space 
Quick tears were raining down his face. 

His heart stood still, aghast with fear; 

A wordless voice, nor far nor near, 

He seemed to hear and not to hear. 

“Tears kindle not the doubtful spark. 

If so, why not? Of this remark 
The bearings are profoundly dark.” 

“Her speech”, he said, “hath caused this pain. 
Easier I count it to explain 
The jargon of the howling main, 

“Or, stretched beside some babbling brook, 

To con, with inexpressive look, 

An unintelligible book.” 

Low spake the voice within his head, 

In words imagined more than said, 

Soundless as ghost’s intended tread: 

“If thou art duller than before, 

Why quittedst thou the voice of lore? 

Why not endure, expecting more?” 

“Rather than that”, he groaned aghast, 

“I’d writhe in depths of cavern vast, 

Some loathly vampire’s rich repast.” 

“ ’Twere hard,” it answered, “themes immense 
To coop within the narrow fence 
That rings thy scant intelligence.” 

2C L.C. 



786 


VERSE 


"Not so,” he urged, "nor once alone: 

But there was something in her tone 
That chilled me to the very bone. 

"Her style was anything but clear, 

And most unpleasantly severe; 

Her epithets were very queer. 

"And yet, so grand were her replies, 

I could not choose but deem her wise; 

I did not dare to criticise; 

"Nor did I leave her, till she went 

So deep in tangled argument 

That all my powers of thought were spent.” 

A little whisper inly slid, 

"Yet truth is truth: you know you did.” 

A little wink beneath the lid. 

And, sickened with excess of dread, 

Prone to the dust he bent his head, 

And lay like one three-quarters dead. 

The whisper left him—like a breeze 
Lost in the depths of leafy trees— 

Left him by no means at his ease. 

Once more he weltered in despair, 

With hands, through denser-matted hair, 
More tightly clenched than then they were. 

When, bathed in Dawn of living red, 
Majestic frowned the mountain head, 

"Tell me my fault,” was all he said. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

When, at high Noon, the blazing sky 
Scorched in his head each haggard eye, 
Then keenest rose his weary cry. 

And when at Eve the unpitying sun 
Smiled grimly on the solemn fun, 
“Alack,” he sighed, “what have I done?” 

But saddest, darkest was the sight, 
When the cold grasp of leaden Night 
Dashed him to earth, and held him tight. 

Tortured, unaided, and alone, 

Thunders were silence to his groan, 
Bagpipes sweet music to its tone: 

“What? Ever thus, in dismal round, 
Shall Pain and Mystery profound 
Pursue me like a sleepless hound. 


“With crimson-dashed and eager jaws. 
Me, still in ignorance of the cause, 
Unknowing what I broke of laws?” 

The whisper to his ear did seem 
Like echoed flow of silent stream, 

Or shadow of forgotten dream, 

The whisper trembling in the wind: 
"Her fate with thine was intertwined,” 
So spake it in his inner mind: 

"Each orbed on each a baleful star: 
Each proved the other’s blight and bar: 
Each unto each were best, most far: 



788 


VERSE 


“Yea, each to each was worse than foe: 
Thou, a scared dullard, gibbering low, 
And she, an avalanche of woe!” 


THEME WITH VARIATIONS 

[Why is it that Poetry has never yet been subjected to that 
process of Dilution which has proved so advantageous to her 
sister-art Music? The Diluter gives us first a few notes of 
some well-known Air, then a dozen bars of his own, then a 
few more notes of the Air, and so on alternately: thus saving 
the listener, if not from all risk of recognizing the melody at 
all, at least from the too-exciting transports which it might 
produce in a more concentrated form. The process is termed 
“setting” by Composers, and any one, that has ever experi¬ 
enced the emotion of being unexpectedly set down in a heap 
of mortar, will recognize the truthfulness of this happy 
phrase. 

For truly, just as the genuine Epicure lingers lovingly 
over a morsel of supreme Venison—whose every fibre seems 
to murmur “Excelsior!”—yet swallow's, ere returning to the 
toothsome dainty, great mouthfuls of oatmeal-porridge and 
winkles: and just as the perfect Connoisseur in Claret per¬ 
mits himself but one delicate sip, and then tosses off a pint or 
more of boarding-school beer: so also-] 

I never loved a dear Gazelle— 

Nor anything that cost me much: 

High prices profit those who sell, 

But why should I be fond of such? 

To glad me with his soft black eye 

My son comes trotting home from school; 

He’s had a fight but can’t tell why — 

He always was a little fool! 


But, when he came to know me well, 
He kicked me out, her testy Sire: 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


789 


And when I stained my hair, that Belle 
Might note the change, and thus admire 

And love me, it was sure to dye 
A muddy green, or staring blue: 

Whilst one might trace, with half an eye, 
The still triumphant carrot through. 


A GAME OF FIVES 

Five little girls of Five, Four, Three, Two, One: 

Rolling on the hearthrug, full of tricks and fun. 

Five rosy girls, in years from Ten to Six: 

Sitting down to lessons—no more time for tricks. 

Five growing girls, from Fifteen to Eleven: 

Music, Drawing, Languages, and food enough for seven! 

Five winsome girls, from Twenty to Sixteen: 

Each young man that calls, I say “Now tell me which you 
mean\” 

Five dashing girls, the youngest Twenty-one: 

But, if nobody proposes, what is there to be done? 

Five showy girls—but Thirty is an age 
When girls may be engaging, but they somehow don’t 
engage. 

Five dressy girls, of Thirty-one or more: 

So gracious to the shy young men they snubbed so much 
before! 

* * * * * * 

Five passe girls—Their age? Well, never mind! 

We jog along together, like the rest of human kind: 



VERSE 


790 

But the quondam “careless bachelor” begins to think he 
knows 

The answer to that ancient problem “how the money 
goes”! 


POETA FIT, NON NASCITUR 

“How shall I be a poet? 

How shall I write in rhyme: 

You told me once ‘the very wish 
Partook of the sublime’. 

Then tell me how! Don’t put me off 
With your ‘another time’!” 

The old man smiled to see him, 

To hear his sudden sally; 

He liked the lad to speak his mind 
Enthusiastically; 

And thought “There’s no hum-drum in him, 
Nor any shilly-shally.” 


“And would you be a poet 
Before you’ve been to school? 
Ah, well! I hardly thought you 
So absolute a fool. 

First learn to be spasmodic— 

A very simple rule. 


“For first you write a sentence, 

And then you chop it small; 

Then mix the bits, and sort them out 
Just as they chance to fall: 

The order of the phrases makes 
No difference at all. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

“Then, if you’d be impressive, 
Remember what I say, 

That abstract qualities begin 
With capitals alway: 

The True, the Good, the Beautiful— 
Those are the things that pay! 


"Next, when you are describing 
A shape, or sound, or tint; 
Don’t state the matter plainly, 
But put it in a hint; 

And learn to look at all things 
With a sort of mental squint.” 


“For instance, if I wished, Sir, 

Of mutton-pies to tell. 

Should I say ‘dreams of fleecy flocks 
Pent in a wheaten cell’ ?” 

“Why, yes,” the old man said: “that phrase 
Would answer very well. 


“Then fourthly, there are epithets 
That suit with any word— 

As well as Harvey’s Reading Sauce 
With fish, or flesh, or bird— 

Of these, ‘wild’, ‘lonely’, ‘weary’, ‘strange’, 
Are much to be preferred.” 


“And will it do, O will it do 
To take them in a lump— 

As ‘the wild man went his weary way 
To a strange and lonely pump’ ?” 
“Nay, nay! You must not hastily 
To such conclusions jump. 



VERSE 


“Such epithets, like pepper, 

Give zest to what you write; 
And, if you strew them sparely, 
They whet the appetite: 

But if you lay them on too thick, 
You spoil the matter quite! 


“Last, as to the arrangement: 

Your reader, you should show him. 
Must take what information he 
Can get, and look for no im¬ 
mature disclosure of the drift 
And purpose of your poem. 


“Therefore, to test his patience— 
How much he can endure— 
Mention no places, names, or dates, 
And evermore be sure 
Throughout the poem to be found 
Consistently obscure. 


“First fix upon the limit 
To which it shall extend: 
Then fill it up with ‘Padding’ 
(Beg some of any friend): 
Your great Sensation-stanza 
You place towards the end.” 


“And what is a Sensation, 
Grandfather, tell me, pray? 

I think I never heard the word 
So used before to-day: 

Be kind enough to mention one 
'Exempli gratia’. ’ ’ 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

And the old man, looking sadly 
Across the garden-lawn, 

Where here and there a dew-drop 
Yet glittered in the dawn, 

Said “Go to the Adelphi, 

And see the ‘Colleen Bawn’. 

"The word is due to Boucicault— 

The theory is his, 

Where life becomes a Spasm, 

And History a Whiz: 

If that is not Sensation, 

I don’t know what it is. 

“Now try your hand, ere Fancy 

Have lost its present glow-’ ’ 

“And then”, his grandson added, 
“We’ll publish it, you know: 

Green cloth—gold-lettered at the back 
In duodecimo!” 

Then proudly smiled that old man 
To see the eager lad 
Rush madly for his pen and ink 
And for his blotting-pad— 

But, when he thought of publishing, 
His face grew stem and sad. 


SIZE AND TEARS 

When on the sandy shore I sit, 
Beside the salt sea-wave. 

And falling into a weeping fit 
Because I dare not shave— 

A little whisper at my ear 
Enquires the reason of my fear. 



VERSE 


I answer “If that ruffian Jones 
Should recognise me here, 

He’d bellow out my name in tones 
Offensive to the ear: 

He chaffs me so on being stout 
(A thing that always puts me out).’’ 


Ah me! I see him on the cliff! 

Farewell, farewell to hope, 

If he should look this way, and if 
He’s got his telescope! 

To whatsoever place I flee. 

My odious rival follows me! 


For every night, and everywhere, 

I meet him out at dinner; 

And when I've found some charming fair, 
And vowed to die or win her, 

The wretch (he’s thin and I am stout) 

Is sure to come and cut me out! 


The girls (just like them!) all agree 
To praise J. Jones, Esquire: 

I ask them what on earth they see 
About him to admire? 

They cry “He is so sleek and slim, 
It’s quite a treat to look at him!’’ 


They vanish in tobacco smoke, 

Those visionary maids— 

I feel a sharp and sudden poke 
Between the shoulder-blades— 

“Why, Brown, my boy! You’re growing stout!” 
(I told you he would find me out!) 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


795 


“My growth is not your business, Sir!” 

“No more it is, my boy! 

But if it’s yours, as I infer, 

Why, Brown, I give you joy! 

A man, whose business prospers so, 

Is just the sort of man to know! 

“It’s hardly safe, though, talking here— 
I’d best get out of reach: 

For such a weight as yours, I fear, 

Must shortly sink the beach!”— 
Insult me thus because I’m stout! 

I vow I’ll go and call him out! 


ATALANTA IN CAMDEN-TOWN 

A y , ’twas here, on this spot, 

In that summer of yore, 

Atalanta did not 
Vote my presence a bore, 

Nor reply to my tenderest talk "She had heard all that 
nonsense before”. 

She’d the brooch I had bought 
And the necklace and sash on, 

And her heart, as I thought, 

Was alive to my passion; 

And she’d done up her hair in the style that the Empress 
had brought into fashion. 

I had been to the play 
With my pearl of a Peri— 

But, for all I could say, 

She declared she was weary, 

That “the place was so crowded and hot, and she couldn’t 
abide that Dundreary” 



796 


VERSE 


Then I thought “Lucky boy! 

’Tis for you that she whimpers!” 

And I noted with joy 
Those sensational simpers: 

And I said “This is scrumptious!”—a phrase I had learned 
from the Devonshire shrimpers. 


And I vowed “ ’Twill be said 
I'm a fortunate fellow, 

When the breakfast is spread, 

When the topers are mellow, 

When the foam of the bride-cake is white, and the fierce 
orange blossoms are yellow! ’ ’ 


O that languishing yawn! 

O those eloquent eyes! 

I was drunk with the dawn 
Of a splendid surmise— 

I was stung by a look, I was slain by a tear, by a tempest 
of sighs. 


Then I whispered “I see 
The sweet secret thou keepest. 

And the yearning for ME 
That thou wistfully weepest! 

And the question is ‘License or Banns?’ though undoubt¬ 
edly Banns are the cheapest.” 


“Be my Hero,” said I, 

“And let me be Leander!” 

But I lost her reply— 

Something ending with “gander”— 

For the omnibus rattled so loud that no mortal could 
quite understand her. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


797 


THE LANG COORTIN’ 

The ladye she stood at her lattice high, 

Wi’ her doggie at her feet; 

Thorough the lattice she can spy 
The passers in the street, 

"There’s one that standeth at the door, 

And tirleth at the pin: 

Now speak and say, my popinjay, 

If I sail let him in.” 

Then up and spake the popinjay 
That flew abune her head: 

"Gae let him in that tirls the pin: 

He cometh thee to wed.” 

O when he cam’ the parlour in, 

A woeful man was he! 

“And dinna ye ken your lover agen, 

Sae well that loveth thee?” 

"And how wad I ken ye loved me, Sir, 

That have been sae lang away? 

And how wad I ken ye loved me. Sir? • 

Ye never telled me sae.” 

Said—"Ladye dear,” and the salt, salt tear 
Cam’ rinnin’ doon his cheek, 

"I have sent the tokens of my love 
This many and many a week. 

"O didna ye get the rings, Ladye, 

The rings o’ the gowd sae fine? 

I wot that I have sent to thee 
Four score, four score and nine.” 



VERSE 


798 

“They cam’ to me,” said that fair ladye. 

“Wow, they were flimsie things!” 

Said—“that chain o’ gowd, my doggie to howd, 

It is made o’ thae self-same rings.” 

“And didna ye get the locks, the locks, 

The locks o’ my ain black hair, 

Whilk I sent by post, whilk I sent by box, 

Whilk I sent by the carrier?” 

“They cam’ to me,” said that fair ladye; 

“And I prithee send nae mair!” 

Said—“that cushion sae red, for my doggie’s head, 

It is stuffed wi’ thae locks o’ hair.” 

“And didna ye get the letter, Ladye, 

Tied wi’ a silken string, 

Whilk I sent to thee frae the far countrie, 

A message of love to bring? ” 

“It cam’ to me frae the far countrie 
Wi’ its silken string and a’; 

But it wasna prepaid,” said that high-born maid, 

“Sae I gar’d them tak’ it awa’.” 

“0 ever alack that ye sent it back, 

It was written sae clerkly and well! 

Now the message it brought, and the boon that it sought. 
I must even say it mysel’.” 

Then up and spake the popinjay, 

Sae wisely counselled he. 

“Now say it in the proper way: 

Gae doon upon thy knee!” 

The lover he turned baith red and pale, 

Went doon upon his knee: 



PHANTASMAGORIA 

“O Ladye, hear the waesome tale 
That must be told to thee! 

“For five lang years, and five lang years, 

I coorted thee by looks; 

By nods and winks, by smiles and tears, 

As I had read in books. 

“For ten lang years, O weary hours! 

I coorted thee by signs; 

By sending game, by sending flowers, 

By sending Valentines. 

“For five lang years, and five lang years, 

I have dwelt in the far countrie, 

Till that thy mind should be inclined 
Mair tenderly to me. 

“Now thirty years are gane and past, 

I am come frae a foreign land: 

I am come to tell thee my love at last— 

O Ladye, gie me thy hand!” 

The ladye she turned not pale nor red, 

But she smiled a pitiful smile: 

“Sic’ a coortin’ as yours, my man,” she said, 
“Takes a lang and a weary while!” 

And out and laughed the popinjay, 

A laugh of bitter scorn: 

“A coortin’ done in sic’ a way. 

It ought not to be borne!” 

Wi' that the doggie barked aloud, 

And up and doon he ran, 

And tugged and strained his chain o’ gowd, 
All for to bite the man. 



8oo 


VERSE 


“0 hush thee, gentle popinjay! 

0 hush thee, doggie dear! 

There is a word I fain wad say, 

It needeth he should hear!" 

Aye louder screamed that ladye fair 
To drown her doggie’s bark: 

Ever the lover shouted mair 
To make that ladye hark: 

Shrill and more shrill the popinjay 
Upraised his angry squall: 

I trow the doggie’s voice that day 
Was louder than them all! 

The serving-men and serving-maids 
Sat by the kitchen fire: 

They heard sic’ a din the parlour within 
As made them much admire. 

Out spake the boy in buttons 
(I ween he wasna thin), 

"Now wha will tae the parlour gae, 

And stay this deadlie din?" 

And they have taen a kerchief, 

Casted their kevils in, 

For wha will tae the parlour gae, 

And stay that deadlie din. 

When on that boy the kevil fell 
To stay the fearsome noise, 

"Gae in," they cried, "whate’er betide, 
Thou prince of button-boys!” 

Syne, he has taen a supple cane 
To swinge that dog sae fat: 

The doggie yowled, the doggie howled 
The louder aye for that. 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


801 


Syne, he has taen a mutton-bane— 

The doggie ceased his noise, 

And followed doon the kitchen stair 
That prince of button-boys! 

Then sadly spake that ladye fair, 

Wi’ a frown upon her brow: 

“0 dearer to me is my sma’ doggie 
Than a dozen sic’ as thou! 

“Nae use, nae use for sighs and tears: 
Nae use at all to fret: 

Sin’ ye’ve bided sae well for thirty years, 
Ye may bide a wee langer yet! ” 

Sadly, sadly he crossed the floor 
And tirled at the pin: 

Sadly went he through the door 
Where sadly he cam’ in. 

“0 gin I had a popinjay 
To fly abune my head, 

To tell me what I ought to say, 

I had by this been wed. 

"0 gin I find anither ladye,” 

He said wi’ sighs and tears, 

“I wot my coortin’ sail not be 
Anither thirty years 

“For gin I find a ladye gay, 

Exactly to my taste. 

I’ll pop the question, aye or nay 
In twenty years at maist.” 



802 


VERSE 


FOUR RIDDLES 

[These consist of two Double Acrostics and two Charades. 

No. I. was written at the request of some young friends, 
who had gone to a ball at an Oxford Commemoration—and 
also as a specimen of what might be done by making the 
Double Acrostic a connected poem instead of what it has 
hitherto been, a string of disjointed stanzas, on every con¬ 
ceivable subject, and about as interesting to read straight 
through as a page of a Cyclopedia. The first two stanzas 
describe the two main words, and each subsequent stanza 
one of the cross "lights”. 

No. II. was written after seeing Miss Ellen Terry perform 
in the play of "Hamlet”. In this case the first stanza de¬ 
scribes the two main words. 

No. III. was written after seeing Miss Marion Terry per¬ 
form in Mr. Gilbert’s play of "Pygmalion and Galatea”. The 
three stanzas respectively describe "My First”, "My Se¬ 
cond”, and "My Whole”.] 


I 

There was an ancient City, stricken down 
With a strange frenzy, and for many a day 
They paced from morn to eve the crowded town, 
And danced the night away. 

1 asked the cause: the aged man grew sad: 

They pointed to a building gray and tall, 

And hoarsely answered “Step inside, my lad, 
And then you’ll see it all.” 


Yet what are all such gaieties to me 
Whose thoughts are full of indices and surds? 
x 2 + jx + 53 
_ii 

~ 3 ' 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


803 


But something whispered “It will soon be done: 

Bands cannot always play, nor ladies smile: 

Endure with patience the distasteful fun 
For just a little while!” 

A change came o’er my Vision—it was night: 

We clove a pathway through a frantic throng: 

The steeds, wild-plunging, filled us with affright: 

The chariots whirled along. 

Within a marble hall a river ran— 

A living tide, half muslin and half cloth: 

And here one mourned a broken wreath or fan, 

Yet swallowed down her wrath: 

And here one offered to a thirsty fair 

(His words half-drowned amid those thunders tuneful) 

Some frozen viand (there were many there), 

A tooth-ache in each spoonful. 

There comes a happy pause, for human strength 
Will not endure to dance without cessation; 

And every one must reach the point at length 
Of absolute prostration. 

At such a moment ladies learn to give, 

To partners who would urge them overmuch, 

A flat and yet decided negative— 

Photographers love such. 

There comes a welcome summons—hope revives, 

And fading eyes grow bright, and pulses quicken: 

Incessant pop the corks, and busy knives 
Dispense the tongue and chicken. 

Flushed with new life, the crowd flows back again: 

And all is tangled talk and mazy motion— 

Much like a waving field of golden grain, 

Or a tempestuous ocean. 



VERSE 


804 

And thus they give the time, that Nature meant 
For peaceful sleep and meditative snores, 

To ceaseless din and mindless merriment 
And waste of shoes and floors. 

And One (we name him not) that flies the flowers, 
That dreads the dances, and that shuns the salads, 
They doom to pass in solitude the hours. 

Writing acrostic-ballads. 

How late it grows! The hour is surely past 
That should have warned us with its double knock? 
The twilight wanes, and morning comes at last— 

“Oh, Uncle, what’s o’clock?” 

The Uncle gravely nods, and wisely winks. 

It may mean much, but how is one to know? 

He opes his mouth—yet out of it, methinks, 

No words of wisdom flow. 

Answer: Commemoration, Monstrosities. 


II 

Empress of Art, for thee I twine 
This wreath with all too slender skill. 
Forgive my Muse each halting line, 

And for the deed accept the will! 


0 day of tears! Whence comes this spectre grim. 
Parting, like Death’s cold river, souls that love? 
Is not he bound to thee, as thou to him, 

By vows, unwhispered here, yet heard above ? 

And still it lives, that keen and heavenward flame, 
Lives in his eye, and trembles in his tone: 

And these wild words of fury but proclaim 
A heart that beats for thee, for thee alone! 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


805 


But all is lost: that mighty mind o’erthrown, 

Like sweet bells jangled, piteous sight to see! 
“Doubt that the stars are fire,” so runs his moan, 
“Doubt Truth herself, but not my love for thee!” 

A sadder vision yet: thine aged sire 

Shaming his hoary locks with treacherous wile! 
And dost thou now doubt Truth to be a liar? 

And wilt thou die, that hast forgot to smile? 

Nay, get thee hence! Leave all thy winsome ways 
And the faint fragrance of thy scattered flowers: 
In holy silence wait the appointed days, 

And weep away the leaden-footed hours. 

Answer: Ellen Terry. 


Ill 

The air is bright with hues of light 
And rich with laughter and with singing: 
Young hearts beat high in ecstasy, 

And banners wave, and bells are ringing: 
But silence falls with fading day. 

And there’s an end to mirth and play. 

Ah, well-a-day! 

Rest your old bones, ye wrinkled crones! 

The kettle sings, the firelight dances. 
Deep be it quaffed, the magic draught 
That fills the soul with golden fancies! 
For Youth and Pleasance will not stay, 
And ye are withered, worn, and gray. 

Ah, well-a-day! 


O fair cold face! O form of grace, 

For human passion madly yearning! 



8o6 


VERSE 


0 weary air of dumb despair, 

From marble won, to marble turning! 
“Leave us not thus!” we fondly pray. 
“We cannot let thee pass away!” 

Ah, well-a-day! 

Answer: Galatea (Gala-tea). 

IV 

My First is singular at best: 

More plural is my Second: 

My Third is far the pluralest— 

So plural-plural, I protest 

It scarcely can be reckoned! 

My First is followed by a bird: 

My Second by believers 
In magic art: my simple Third 
Follows, not often, hopes absurd 
And plausible deceivers. 

My First to get at wisdom tries— 

A failure melancholy! 

My Second men revered as wise: 

My Third from heights of wisdom flies 
To depths of frantic folly. 

My First is ageing day by day: 

My Second’s age is ended: 

My Third enjoys an age, they say, 
That never seems to fade away, 
Through centuries extended. 

My Whole? I need a poet’s pen 
To paint her myriad phases: 

The monarch, and the slave, of men— 
A mountain-summit, and a den 
Of dark and deadly mazes— 



PHANTASMAGORIA 


807 


A flashing light—a fleeting shade—- 
Beginning, end, and middle 
Of all that human art hath made 
Or wit devised! Go, seek her aid, 

If you would read my riddle! 

Answer: Imagination (I-Magi-nation). 


FAME’S PENNY-TRUMPET 

[Affectionately dedicated to all “original researchers” who 
pant for “endowment”.] 

Blow, blow your trumpets till they crack, 

Ye little men of little souls! 

And bid them huddle at your back— 

Gold-sucking leeches, shoals on shoals! 

Fill all the air with hungry wails— 

“Reward us, ere we think or write! 

Without your Gold mere Knowledge fails 
To sate the swinish appetite!” 

And, where great Plato paced serene, 

Or Newton paused with wistful eye, 

Rush to the chace with hoofs unclean 
And Babel-clamour of the sty. 

Be yours the pay: be theirs the praise: 

We will not rob them of their due,. 

Nor vex the ghosts of other days 
By naming them along with you. 

They sought and found undying fame: 

They toiled not for reward nor thanks: 

Their cheeks are hot with honest shame 
For you, the modem mountebanks! 



VERSE 


Who preach of Justice—plead with tears 
That Love and Mercy should abound— 

While marking with complacent ears 
The moaning of some tortured hound: 

Who prate of Wisdom—nay, forbear, 

Lest Wisdom turn on you in wrath, 

Trampling, with heel that will not spare. 
The vermin that beset her path! 

Go, throng each other’s drawing-rooms, 

Ye idols of a petty clique: 

Strut your brief hour in borrowed plumes 
And make your penny-trumpets squeak: 

Deck your dull talk with pilfered shreds 
Of learning from a nobler time, 

And oil each other’s little heads 

With mutual Flattery’s golden slime: 

And when the topmost height ye gain, 

And stand in Glory’s ether clear, 

And grasp the prize of all your pain— 

So many hundred pounds a year— 

9 

Then let Fame’s banner be unfurled! 

Sing Paeans for a victory won! 

Ye tapers, that would light the world, 

And cast a shadow on the Sun— 

Who still shall pour His rays sublime, 

One crystal flood, from East to West, 

When ye have burned your little time 
And feebly flickered into rest! 



COLLEGE RHYMES AND 
NOTES BY AN OXFORD CHIEL 

FROM COLLEGE RHYMES 

ODE TO DAMON 

{From Chloe, who Understands His Meaning.) 

“Oh, do not forget the day when we met 
At the fruiterer’s shop in the city: 

When you said I was plain and excessively vain, 

But I knew that you meant I was pretty. 

“Recollect, too, the hour when I purchased the flour 
(For the dumplings, you know) and the suet; 

Whilst the apples I told my dear Damon to hold, 

(Just to see if you knew how to do it). 

“Then recall to your mind how you left me behind, 

And went off in a ’bus with the pippins; 

When you said you’d forgot, but I knew you had not] 

(It was merely to save the odd threepence!). 

“Don’t forget your delight in the dumplings that night, 
Though you said they were tasteless and doughy: 

But you winked as you spoke, and I saw that the joke 
{If it was one) was meant for your Chloe! 

“Then remember the day when Joe offered to pay 
For us all at the Great Exhibition; 

You proposed a short cut, and we found the thing shut, 
(We were two hours too late for admission). 

809 



8lO VERSE 

“Your ‘short cut’, dear, we found took us seven miles 
round 

(And Joe said exactly what we did): 

Well, I helped you out then—it was just like you men— 
Not an atom of sense when it’s needed! 

“You said ‘What’s to be done?’ and I thought you in fun, 
(Never dreaming you were such a ninny). 

‘Home directly!’ said I, and you paid for the fly, 

(And I think that you gave him a guinea). 

“Well, that notion, you said, had not entered your head: 

You proposed ‘The best thing, as we’re come, is 
(Since it opens again in the morning at ten) 

To wait’— Oh, you prince of all dummies! 

“And when Joe asked you ‘Why, if a man were to die, 

Just as you ran a sword through his middle. 

You’d be hung for the crime?’ and you said ‘Give me 
time!’ 

And brought to your Chloe the riddle— 

“Why, remember, you dunce, how I solved it at once— 
(The question which Joe had referred to you), 

Why, I told you the cause, was ‘the force of the laws’, 

And you said ‘It had never occurred to you.’ 

"This instance will show that your brain is too slow, 

And (though your exterior is showy), 

Yet so arrant a goose can be no sort of use 
To society—come to your Chloe! 

“You’ll find no one like me, who can manage to see 
Your meaning, you talk so obscurely: 

Why, if once I were gone, how would you get on? 

Come, you know what I mean, Damon, surely.” 


1861. 



COLLEGE RHYMES 


8ll 


THOSE HORRID HURDY-GURDIES! 

A MONODY, BY A VICTIM 

“M y mother bids me bind my hair,” 

And not go about such a figure; 

It’s a bother, of course, but wfiat do I care? 

I shall do as I please when I’m bigger. 

“My lodging is on the cold, cold ground,” 

As the first-floor and attic were taken. 

I tried the garret but once, and found 
That my wish for a change was mistaken. 

"Ever of thee!” yes, “Ever of thee!” 

They chatter more and more, 

Till I groan aloud, "Oh! let me be! 

I have heard it all before!” 

“Please remember the organ, sir,” 

What? hasn’t he left me yet? 

I promise, good man; for its tedious burr 
I never can forget. 

1861. 


MY FANCY 

I painted her a gushing thing, 
With years perhaps a score; 

I little thought to find they were 
At least a dozen more; 

My fancy gave her eyes of blue, 
A curly auburn head: 

I came to find the blue a green, 
The auburn turned to red. 



8l2 


VERSE 


She boxed my ears this morning, 
They tingled very much; 

I own that I could wish her 
A somewhat lighter touch; 

And if you were to ask me how 
Her charms might be improved, 

I would not have them added to, 

But just a few removed ! 

She has the bear’s ethereal grace, 

The bland hyena’s laugh, 

The footstep of the elephant, 

The neck of the giraffe; 

I love her still, believe me, 

Though my heart its passion hides; 

“She’s all my fancy painted her,” 

But oh! how much besides ! 

Mar. 15,1862. 


THE MAJESTY OF JUSTICE 

AN OXFORD IDYLL 

They passed beneath the College gate; 

And down the High went slowly on; 
Then spake the Undergraduate 
To that benign and portly Don: 

“They say that Justice is a Queen— 

A Queen of awful Majesty— 

Yet in the papers I have seen 
Some things that puzzle me. 

"A Court obscure, so rumour states, 
There is, called ‘Vice-Cancellarii’, 
Which keeps on Undergraduates, 

Who do not pay their bills, a wary eye. 



COLLEGE RHYMES 

A case I’m told was lately brought 
Into that tiniest of places, 

And justice in that case was sought— 
As in most other cases. 


“Well! Justice as I hold, dear friend, 
Is Justice, neither more than less: 
I never dreamed it could depend 
On ceremonial or dress. 

I thought that her imperial sway 
In Oxford surely would appear. 
But all the papers.seem to say 
She’s not majestic here.” 


The portly Don he made reply, 

With the most roguish of his glances, 
“Perhaps she drops her Majesty 
Under peculiar circumstances.” 

“But that’s the point!” the young man cried, 
“The puzzle that I wish to pen you in— 
How are the public to decide 
Which article is genuine? 

“Is’t only when the Court is large 
That we for ‘Majesty’ need hunt? 

Would what is Justice in a barge 
Be something different in a punt? 

“Nay, nay!” the Don replied, amused, 
“You’re talking nonsense, sir! You know it 
Such arguments were never used 
By any friend of Jowett.” 


“Then is it in the men who trudge 
(Beef-eaters I believe they call them) 
Before each wigged and ermined judge, 

For fear some mischief should befall them? 



814 


VERSE 


If I should recognise in one 

(Through all disguise) my own domestic, 

I fear ’twould shed a gleam of fun 
Even on the 'Majestic’!” 

The portly Don replied, “Ahem! 

They can't exactly be its essence : 

I scarcely think the want of them 
The‘Majesty of Justice’lessens. 

Besides, they always march awry; 

Their gorgeous garments never fit: 
Processions don’t make Majesty— 

I’m quite convinced of it.” 

“Then is it in the wig it lies. 

Whose countless rows of rigid curls 
Are gazed at with admiring eyes 
By country lads and servant-girls?” 

Out laughed that bland and courteous Don: 

“Dear sir, I do not mean to flatter— 

But surely you have hit upon 
The essence of the matter. 

“They will not own the Majesty 
Of Justice, making Monarchs bow. 
Unless as evidence they see 

The horsehair wig upon her brow. 

Yes, yes! That makes the silliest men 
Seem wise; the meanest men look big: 
The Majesty of Justice, then, 

Is seated in the WIG.” 


March 1863. 



FROM NOTES BY AN OXFORD CHIEL 


THE ELECTIONS TO THE HEBDOMADAL 

COUNCIL 

[In the year 1866, a Letter with the above title was pub¬ 
lished in Oxford, addressed by Mr. Gold win Smith to the 
Senior Censor of Christ Church, with the two-fold object of 
revealing to the University a vast political misfortune which 
it had unwittingly encountered, and of suggesting a remedy 
which should at once alleviate the bitterness of the calamity 
and secure the sufferers from its recurrence. The misfortune 
thus revealed was no less than the fact that, at a recent elec¬ 
tion of Members to the Hebdomadal Council, two Conserva¬ 
tives had been chosen, thus giving a Conservative majority 
in the Council; and the remedy suggested was a sufficiently 
sweeping one, embracing, as it did, the following details: 

1. "The exclusion” (from Congregation) "of the non- 
academical elements which form a main part of the strength 
of this party domination.” These "elements” are afterwards 
enumerated as "the parish clergy and the professional men 
of the city, and chaplains who are without any academical 
occupation”. 

2. The abolition of the Hebdomadal Council. 

3. The abolition of the legislative functions of Convoca¬ 
tion. 

These are all the main features of this remarkable scheme 
of Reform, unless it be necessary to add— 

4. "To preside over a Congregation with full legislative 
powers, the Vice-Chancellor ought no doubt to be a man of 
real capacity.” 

But it would be invidious to suppose that there was any 
intention of suggesting this as a novelty. 

The following rhythmical version of the Letter develops 
its principles to an extent which possibly the writer had 
never contemplated.] 


815 



8 i6 


VERSE 


“Now is the winter of our discontent.” 1 

“Heard ye the arrow hurtle in the sky? 

Heard ye the dragon-monster’s dreadful cry?”— 

Excuse this sudden burst of the Heroic; 

The present state of things would vex a Stoic! 

And just as Sairey Gamp, for pains within, 

Administered a modicum of gin, 

So does my mind, when vexed and ill at ease, 

Console itself with soothing similes, 

The “dragon-monster” (pestilential schism!) 

I need not tell you is Conservatism. 

The “hurtling arrow” (till we find a better) 

Is represented by the present Letter. 

’Twas, I remember, but the other day, 

Dear Senior Censor, that you chanced to say 
You thought these party-combinations would 
Be found, “though needful, no unmingled good.” 
Unmingled good? They are unmingled ill! 2 
I never took to them, and never will— 3 
What am I saying? Heed it not, my friend: 

On the next page I mean to recommend 
The very dodges that I now condemn 
In the Conservatives! Don’t hint to them 
A word of this! (In confidence. Ahem!) 

Need I rehearse the history of Jowett ? . 

I need not, Senior Censor, for you know it. 4 
That was the Board Hebdomadal, and oh! 

Who would be free, themselves must strike the blow! 

1 Dr. Wynter, President of St.John’s, one of the recently elected 
Conservative members of Council. 

2 “In a letter on a point connected with the late elections to the 
Hebdomadal Council you incidentally remarked to me that our 
combinations for these elections, ‘though necessary were not an 
unmixed good’. They are an unmixed evil”. 

3 “I never go to a caucus without reluctance: I never write a can¬ 
vassing letter without a feeling of repugnance to my task.” 

4 “I need not rehearse the history of the Regius Professor of 
Greek.” 



NOTES BY AN OXFORD CHIEL 817 

Let each that wears a beard, and each that shaves, 

Join in the cry “We never will be slaves!’’ 

“But can the University afford 
To be a slave to any kind of board? 

A slave?” you shuddering ask. “Think you it can, Sir?” 
“Not at the present moment,” is my answer. 1 
I’ve thought the matter o’er and o’er again 
And given to it all my powers of brain; 

I’ve thought it out, and this is what I make it, 

(And I don’t care a Tory how you take it:) 

It may be right to go ahead, I guess: j 
It may be right to stop, I do confess; t 
Also, it may be right to retrogress . 2 1 


So says the oracle, and, for myself, I 
Must say it beats to fits the one at Delphi! 

To save beloved Oxford from the yoke, 

(For this majority’s beyond a joke), 

We must combine, 3 aye! hold a caucus- meeting, 4 
Unless we want to get another beating. 

That they should “bottle” us is nothing new— 

But shall they bottle us and caucus too ? 

See the “fell unity of purpose” now 

With such Obstructives plunge into the row! 5 

“Factious Minorities,” we used to sigh— 

“Factious Majorities” is now the cry. 

“Votes—ninety-two”—no combination here: 

1 "The University cannot afford at the present moment to be 
delivered over as a slave to any non-academical interest what¬ 
ever.” 

2 “It may be right to go on, it may be right to stand still, or it 
may be right to go back. ’ ’ 

3 "To save the University from going completely under the yoke 
. . . we shall still be obliged to combine.” 

4 "Caucus-holding and wire-pulling would still be almost inevi¬ 
tably carried on to some extent.” 

8 “But what are we to do? Here is a great political and theo¬ 
logical party . . . labouring under perfect discipline and with fell 
unity of purpose, to hold the University in subjection, and fill her 
government with its nominees.” 

2D L.C. 



8i8 


VERSE 


“Votes—ninety-three"—conspiracy, 'tis clear! 1 
You urge “ 'Tis but a unit.” I reply 
That in that unit lurks their “unity”. 

Our voters often bolt, and often baulk us, 

But then, they never, never go to caucus! 

Our voters ca’n’t forget the maxim famous 
"Semel electum semper eligamus 
They never can be worked into a ferment 
By visionary promise of preferment, 

Nor taught, by hints of “Paradise” 2 beguiled, 

To whisper “C for Chairman” like a child! 3 
And thus the friends that we have tempted down 
Oft take the two-o'clock Express for town. 4 

This is our danger: this the secret foe 
That aims at Oxford such a deadly blow. 

What champion can we find to save the State, 

To crush the plot? We darkly whisper “Wait!” 5 

My scheme is this: remove the votes of all 
The residents that are not Liberal— 6 
Leave the young Tutors uncontrolled and free, 
And Oxford then shall see—what it shall see. 
What next? Why then, I say, let Convocation 


1 At a recent election to Council, the Liberals mustered ninety- 
two votes and the Conservatives ninety-three; whereupon the 
latter were charged with having obtained their victory by a con¬ 
spiracy. 

2 Not to mention that, as we cannot promise Paradise to our 
supporters, they are very apt to take the train for London just 
before the election. 

3 It is not known to what the word “Paradise” was intended to 
allude, and therefore the hint, here thrown out, that the writer 
meant to recall the case of the late Chairman of Mr. Gladstone’s 
committee, who had been recently collated to the See of Chester, 
is wholly wanton and gratuitous. 

4 A case of this kind had actually occurred on the occasion of 
the division just alluded to. 

5 Mr. Wayte, now President of Trinity, then put forward as the 
Liberal candidate for election to Council. 

6 “You and others suggest, as the only effective remedy, that 
the Constituency should be reformed, by the exclusion of the non- 
academical elements which form a main part of the strength of 
this party domination.” 



NOTES BY AN OXFORD CHIEL 819 

Be shorn of all her powers of legislation . 1 
But why stop there? Let us go boldly on— 

Sweep everything beginning with a “Con” 

Into oblivion! Convocation first, 

Conservatism next, and, last and worst, 

“Concilium Hebdomadale” must, 

Consumed and conquered, be consigned to dust ! 2 

And here I must relate a little fable 
I heard last Saturday at our high table:— 

The cats, it seems, were masters of the house, 

And held their own against the rat and mouse: 

Of course the others couldn’t stand it long, 

So held a caucus (not, in their case, wrong); 

And, when they were assembled to a man, 

Uprose an aged rat, and thus began:— 

“Brothers in bondage! Shall we bear to be 
For ever left in a minority? 

With what 'fell unity of purpose’ cats 
Oppose the trusting innocence of rats! 

So unsuspicious are we of disguise, 

Their machinations take us by surprise — 3 
Insulting and tyrannical absurdities ! 4 
Is it too bad by half—upon my word it is! 

For, now that these Con-, cats, I should say (frizzle 

’em!), 

Are masters, they exterminate like Islam ! 5 
How shall we deal with them? I’ll tell you how:— 

1 “I confess that, having included all the really academical ele¬ 
ments in Congregation, I would go boldly on, and put an end to 
the Legislative functions of Convocation.” 

2 ‘‘This conviction, that while we have Elections to Council we 
shall not entirely get rid of party organization and its evils, leads 
me to venture a step further, and to raise the question whether it 
is really necessary that we should have an Elective Council for 
legislative purposes at all.” 

3 ‘‘Sometimes, indeed, not being informed that the wires are at 
work, we are completely taken by surprise.” 

4 ‘‘We are without protection against this most insulting and 
tyrannical absurdity.” 

5 ‘‘It is as exterminating as Islam.” 



820 


VERSE 


Let none but kittens be allowed to miaow! 

The Liberal kittens seize us but in play, 

And, while they frolic, we can run away; 

But older cats are not so generous, 

Their claws are too Conservative for us! 

Then let them keep the stable and the oats, 

While kittens, rats, and mice have all the votes, 

"Yes; banish cats! The kittens would not use 
Their powers for blind obstruction , 1 nor refuse 
To let us sip the cream and gnaw the cheese— 

How glorious then would be our destinies ! 2 
Kittens and rats would occupy the throne, 

And rule the larder for itself alone!” 3 

So rhymed my friend, and asked me what I thought 
of it. 

I told him that so much as I had caught of it 
Appeared to me (as I need hardly mention) 

Entirely undeserving of attention. 

But now, to guide the Congregation, when 
It numbers none but really "able” men, 

A “Vice-Cancellarius” will be needed 
Of every kind of human weakness weeded! 

Is such the president that we have got? 

He ought no doubt to be; why should he not ? 4 
I do not hint that Liberals should dare 
To oust the present holder of the chair— 

But surely he would not object to be 

1 "Their powers would scarcely be exercised for the purposes of 
fanaticism, or in a spirit of blind obstruction.” 

2 "These narrow local bounds, within which our thoughts and 
schemes have hitherto been pent, will begin to disappear, and a 
far wider sphere of action will open on the view.” 

8 "Those councils must be freely opened to all who can serve her 
well and who will serve her for herself.” 

4 "To preside over a Congregation with full legislative powers, 
the Vice-Chancellor ought no doubt to be a man of real capacity; 
but why should he not ? His mind ought also, for this as well as for 
his other high functions, to be*clear of petty details, and devoted 
to the great matters of University business; but why should not 
this condition also be fulfilled?” 



NOTES BY AN OXFORD CHIEL 821 

Gently examined by a Board of three? 

Their duty being just to ascertain 

That he’s “all there” (I mean, of course, in brain), 

And that his mind, from “petty details” clear, 

Is fitted for the duties of his sphere. 

All this is merely moonshine, till we get 
The seal of Parliament upon it set. 

A word then, Senior Censor, in your ear: 

The Government is in a state of fear— 

Like some old gentleman, abroad at night, 

Seized with a sudden shiver of affright, 

Who offers money, on his bended knees, 

To the first skulking vagabond he sees— 

Now is the lucky moment for our task; 

They daren’t refuse us anything we ask ! 1 

And then our Fellowships shall open be 
To Intellect, no meaner quality! 

No moral excellence, no social fitness 
Shall ever be admissible as witness. 

“Avaunt, dull Virtue!” is Oxonia’s cry: 

“Come to my arms, ingenious Villainy!” 

For Classic Fellowships, an honour high, 

Simonides and Co. will then apply— 

Our Mathematics will to Oxford bring 
The ’cutest members of the betting-ring— 

Law Fellowships will start upon their journeys 
A myriad of unscrupulous attorneys— 

While prisoners, doomed till now to toil unknown, 

Shall mount the Physical Professor’s throne! 

And thus would Oxford educate, indeed, 

Men far beyond a merely local need— 

1 “If you apply now to Parliament for this or any other Univer¬ 
sity reform, you will find the House of Commons in a propitious 
mood. . \ . Even the Conservative Government, as it looks for the 
support of moderate Liberals on the one great subject, is very un¬ 
willing to present itself in such an aspect that these men may not 
be able decently to give it their support.” 



822 


VERSE 


With no career before them, I may say , 1 
Unless they’re wise enough to go away, 

And seek far West, or in the distant East, 

Another flock of pigeons to be fleeced. 

I might go on, and trace the destiny 
Of Oxford in an age which, though it be 
Thus breaking with tradition, owns a new 
Allegiance to the intellectual few— 

(I mean, of course, the—pshaw! no matter who!) 

But, were I to pursue the boundless theme, 

I fear that I should seem to you to dream . 2 

This to fulfil, or even—humbler far— 

To shun Conservatism’s noxious star 
And all the evils that it brings behind, 

These pestilential coils must be untwined— 

The party-coils, that clog the march of Mind— 

Choked in whose meshes Oxford, slowly wise, 

Has lain for three disastrous centuries . 3 
Away with them! (It is for this I yearn!) 

Each twist untwist, each Turner overturn! 

Disfranchise each Conservative, and cancel 
The votes of Michell, Liddon, Wall, and Mansel! 

Then, then shall Oxford be herself again, 

Neglect the heart, and cultivate the brain— 

Then this shall be the burden of our song, 

“All change is good—whatever is, is wrong—’’ 

Then Intellect’s proud flag shall be unfurled, 

And Brain, and Brain alone, shall rule the world! 

1 “With open Fellowships, Oxford will soon produce a supply of 
men fit for the work of high education far beyond her own local 
demands, and in fact with no career before them unless a career 
can be opened elsewhere.” 

2 "I should seem to you to dream if I were to say what I think 
the destiny of the University may be in an age which, though it is 
breaking with tradition, is, from the same causes, owning a new 
allegiance to intellectual authority.” 

8 “But to fulfil this, or even a far humbler destiny—to escape 
the opposite lot—the pestilential coils of party, in which the Uni¬ 
versity has lain for three disastrous centuries choked, must be 
untwined.” 



NOTES BY AN OXFORD CHIEL 


THE DESERTED PARKS 

“Solitudinem faciunt: Parcum appellant.” 

Museum! loveliest building of the plain 
Where Cherwell winds towards the distant main; 

How often have I loitered o’er thy green, 

Where humble happiness endeared the scene! 

How often have I paused on every charm, 

The rustic couple walking arm in arm— 

The groups of trees, with seats beneath the shade 
For prattling babes and whisp’ring lovers made— 

The never-failing brawl, the busy mill 
Where tiny urchins vied in fistic skill— 

(Two phrases only have that dusky race 
Caught from the learned influence of the place; 
Phrases in their simplicity sublime, 

“Scramble a copper!” “Please, Sir, what’s the time?”) 
These round thy walks their cheerful influence shed; 
There were thy charms—but all these charms are fled. 

Amidst thy bowers the tyrant’s hand is seen, 

And rude pavilions sadden all thy green; 

One selfish pastime grasps the whole domain, 

And half a faction swallows up the plain; 

Adown thy glades, all sacrificed to cricket, 

The hollow-sounding bat now guards the wicket; 

Sunk are thy mounds in shapeless level all. 

Lest aught impede the swiftly rolling ball; 

And trembling, shrinking from the fatal blow, 

Far, far away thy hapless children go. 

Ill fares the place, to luxury a prey, 

Where wealth accumulates, and minds decay; 

Athletic sports may flourish or may fade, 

Fashion may make them, even as it has made; 

But the broad parks, the city’s joy and pride, 

When once destroyed can never be supplied! 



VERSE 


824 

Ye friends to truth, ye statesmen, who survey 
The rich man’s joys increase, the poor’s decay, 

’Tis yours to judge, how wide the limits stand 
Between a splendid and a happy land. 

Proud swells go by with laugh of hollow joy, 

And shouting Folly hails them with "Ahoy!” 

Funds even beyond the miser’s wish abound, 

And rich men flock from all the world around. 

Yet count our gains. This wealth is but a name, 

That leaves our useful products still the same. 

Not so the loss. The man of wealth and pride 
Takes up a space that many poor supplied; 

Space for the game, and all its instruments, 

Space for pavilions and for scorers’ tents; 

The ball, that raps his shins in padding cased, 

Has worn the verdure to an arid waste; 

His Park, where these exclusive sports are seen, 
Indignant spurns the rustic from the green; 

While through the plain, consigned to silence all, 

In barren splendour flits the russet ball. 

In peaceful converse with his brother Don, 

Here oft the calm Professor wandered on; 

Strange words he used—men drank w r ith wondering ears 
The languages called "dead”, the tongues of other years. 
(Enough of Heber! Let me once again 
Attune my verse to Goldsmith’s liquid strain.) 

A man he was to undergraduates dear, 

And passing rich with forty pounds a year. 

And so, I ween, he would have been till now, 

Had not his friends (’twere long to tell you how) 
Prevailed on him, Jack-Horner-like, to try 
Some method to evaluate his pie, 

And win from those dark depths, with skilful thumb, 
Five times a hundredweight of luscious plum— 

Yet for no thirst of wealth, no love of praise, 

In learned labour he consumed his days! 

0 Luxury! thou cursed by Heaven’s decree, 

How ill exchanged are things like these for thee! 



NOTES BY AN OXFORD CHIEL 

How do thy potions, with insidious joy, 

Diffuse their pleasures only to destroy; 

Iced cobbler, Badminton, and shandy-gaff, 

Rouse the loud jest and idiotic laugh; 

Inspired by them, to tipsy greatness grown, 

Men boast a florid vigour not their own; 

At every draught more wild and wild they grow; 
While pitying friends observe “I told you so!” 
Till, summoned to their post, at the first ball, 

A feeble under-hand, their wickets fall. 

Even now the devastation is begun, 

And half the business of destruction done; 

Even now, methinks while pondering here in pity, 
I see the rural Virtues leave the city. 

Contented Toil, and calm scholastic Care, 

And frugal Moderation, all are there; 

Resolute Industry that scorns the lure 
Of careless mirth—that dwells apart secure— 

To science gives her days, her midnight oil, 
Cheered by the sympathy of others’ toil— 
Courtly Refinement, and that Taste in dress 
That brooks no meanness, yet avoids excess— 

All these I see, with slow reluctant pace 
Desert the long-beloved and honoured place! 

While yet 'tis time, Oxonia, rise and fling 
The spoiler from thee: grant no parleying! 

Teach him that eloquence, against the wrong. 
Though very poor, may-still be very strong; 

That party-interests we must forgo, 

When hostile to “pro bono publico”; 

That faction’s empire hastens to its end. 

When once mankind to common sense attend; 
While independent votes may win the day 
Even against the potent spell of “Play!” 

May 1867. 


825 



826 


VERSE 


EXAMINATION STATUTE 

[“The Statute proposed to allow candidates for a degree to 
forsake Classics after Moderations, except so far as was need¬ 
ed for a Fourth Class in the Final School of Literae Humani- 
ores, if they wished to graduate in science. This Dodgson 
considered degrading both to Classics and to Mathematics.” 
—Dodgson Handbook .] 

A list of those who might, could, would, or should have 
voted thereon in Congregation, February 2, 4681, arranged 
alphabetically. 

A is for [Acland], who’d physic the Masses, 

B is for [Brodie], who swears by the gases. 

C is for [Conington], constant to Horace. 

D is for [Donkin], who integrates for us. 

E is for [Evans], with rifle well steadied. 

F is for [Freeman], Examiner dreaded! 

G’s [Goldwin Smith], by the "Saturday” quoted. 

H is for [Heurtley], to "Margaret” devoted. 

I am the Author, a rhymer erratic— 

J is for [Jowett], who lectures in Attic: 

K is for [Kitchen], than attic much warmer. 

L is for [Liddell], relentless reformer! 

M is for [Mansel], our Logic-provider, 

And [Norris] is N, once a famous rough-rider. 

[Ogilvie]’s O, Orthodoxy’s Mendoza! 

And [Parker] is P, the amendment-proposer. 

Q is the Quad, where the Dons are collecting. 

R is for [Rolleston], who lives for dissecting: 

S is for [Stanley], sworn foe to formality. 

T’s [Travers Twiss], full of civil legality. 

U’s University, factiously splitting— 

V’s the Vice-Chancellor, ceaselessly sitting. 

W’s [Wall], by Museum made frantic, 

X the Xpenditure, grown quite gigantic. 

Y are the Young men, whom nobody thought about— 

Z is the Zeal that this victory brought about. 



ACROSTICS, INSCRIPTIONS, 
AND OTHER VERSES 


ACROSTIC 

Little maidens, when you look 
On this little story-book, 
Reading with attentive eye 
Its enticing history, 

Never think that hours of play 
Are your only HOLIDAY, 

And that in a HOUSE of joy 
Lessons serve but to annoy: 

If in any HOUSE you find 
Children of a gentle mind, 

Each the others pleasing ever— 
Each the others vexing never— 
Daily work and pastime daily 
In their order taking gaily— 
Then be very sure that they 
Have a life of HOLIDAY. 

Christmas 1861. 


827 



82 8 


VERSE 


TO THREE PUZZLED LITTLE GIRLS, 
FROM THE AUTHOR 

[To the three Misses Drury.) 

Three little maidens weary of the rail. 

Three pairs of little ears listening to a tale, 

Three little hands held out in readiness. 

For three little puzzles very hard to guess. 

Three pairs of little eyes, open wonder-wide, 

At three little scissors lying side by side. 

Three little mouths that thanked an unknown Friend, 
For one little book, he undertook to send. 

Though whether they'll remember a friend, or book, 
day— 

In three little weeks is very hard to say. 

August 1869. 


DOUBLE ACROSTIC 

(To Miss E. M. Argles.) 

I s 1 n g a place wherein agree 
All things on land that fairest be, 
All that is sweetest of the sea. 

Nor can I break the silken knot 
That binds my memory to the spot 
And friends too dear to be forgot. 


* 

On rocky brow we loved to stand 
And watch in silence, hand in hand, 



ACROSTICS AND OTHER VERSES 829 

The shadows veiling sea and land. B luf F 

Then dropped the breeze; no vessel passed: 

So silent stood each taper mast, 

You would have deemed it chained and 

fast. A ncho R 

Above the blue and fleecy sky: 

Below, the waves that quivering lie, 

Like crisped curls of greenery. B roccol I 

“A sail!” resounds from every lip. 

Mizen, no, square-sail—ah, you trip! 

Edith, it cannot be a ship! B arqu E 

So home again from sea and beach, 

One nameless feeling thrilling each. 

A sense of beauty, passing speech. A ppreciatio N 

Let lens and tripod be unslung! 

“Dolly!” 's the word on every tongue; 

Dolly must sit, for she is young! C hil D 

Photography shall change her face, 

Distort it with uncouth grimace— 

Make her. bloodthirsty, fierce, and base. O diou S 

I end my song while scarce begun; 

For I should want, ere all was done, 

Four weeks to tell the tale of one: M ont H 

And I should need as large a hand, 

To paint a scene so wild and grand, 

Ashe who traversed Egypt’s land. B elzon I 

What say you, Edith? Will it suit ye? 

Reject it, if it fails in beauty: 

You know your liter ary duty! E ditorshi P 


On the rail between Torquay and Guildford, Sep. 28, 1869. 



830 


VERSE 


THREE LITTLE MAIDS 

(To the three Misses Drury.) 

Three little maids, one winter day, 

While others went to feed, 

To sing, to laugh, to dance, to play, 

More wisely went to—Reed. 

Others, when lesson-time’s begun, 

Go, half inclined to cry, 

Some in a walk, some in a run; 

But these went in a—Fly. 

I give to other little maids 
A smile, a kiss, a look, 

Presents whose memory quickly fades; 

I give to these—a Book. 

Happy Arcadia may blind, 

While all abroad, their eyes; 

At home, this book (I trust) they’ll find 
A very catching prize. 

PUZZLE 

(To Mary, Ina, and Harriet or “Hartie” Watson.) 

When . a. y and I. a told . a .. ie they’d seen a 
Small. . ea . u . e with . i . . . , dressed in crimson and 
blue, 

. a .. ie cried “ ’Twas a. ai. y! Why, I. a and . a . y, 

I should have been happy if I had been you!” 

Said. a. y “You wouldn’t.” Said I. a "You shouldn’t— 
Since you ca’n’t be us, and we couldn’t be you. 

You are one, my dear . a .. ie, but we are a . a .. y, 

And a . i. .. e . i. tells us that one isn’t two.” 



ACROSTICS AND OTHER VERSES 


831 


THREE CHILDREN 

(To Miss Mary Watson.) 

Three children (their names were so fearful 
You’ll excuse me for leaving them out) 

Sat silent, with faces all tearful— 

What was it about? 

They were sewing, but needles are prickly, 

And fingers were cold as could be— 

So they didn’t get on very quickly, 

And they wept, silly Three! 

“O Mother!” said they, “Guildford’s not a 
Nice place for the winter, that’s flat. 

If you know any country that’s hotter, 

Please take us to that!” 

“Cease crying,” said she, “little daughter! 

And when summer comes back with the flowers, 

You shall roam by the edge of the water, 

In sunshiny hours.” 

“And in summer”, said sorrowful Mary, 

“We shall hear the shrill scream of the train 

That will bring that dear writer of fairy¬ 
tales hither again.” 

(Now the person she meant to allude to 
Was—well! it is best to forget. 

It was some one she always was rude to, 

Whenever they met.) 

“It’s my duty”, their Mother continued, 

“To fill with things useful and right 

Your small minds: if I put nothing in, you’d 
Be ignorant quite. 



832 


VERSE 


“But enough now of lessons and thinking: 

Your meal is quite ready, I see— 

So attend to your eating and drinking, 
You thirsty young Three!” 

Apr. 10, 1871. 


TWO THIEVES 

(To the Misses Drury.) 

Two thieves went out to steal one day 
Thinking that no one knew it: 

Three little maids, I grieve to say, 
Encouraged them to do it. 

'Tis said that little children should 
Encourage men in stealing! 

But these, I’ve always understood, 

Have got no proper feeling. 

An aged friend, who chanced to pass 
Exactly at the minute, 

Said “Children! Take this Looking-glass, 
And see your badness in it.” 

Jan. 11, 1872. 


TWO ACROSTICS 

(To Miss Ruth Dymes.) 

Round the wondrous globe I wander wild, 
Up and down-hill—Age succeeds to youth— 
Toiling all in vain to find a child 
Half so loving, half so dear as Ruth. 



ACROSTICS AND OTHER VERSES 833 

(To Miss Margaret Dymes.) 

Maidens, if a maid you meet 
Always free from pout and pet, 

Ready smile and temper sweet, 

Greet my little Margaret. 

And if loved by all she be 
Rightly, not a pampered pet, 

Easily you then may see 
Tis my little Margaret. 


DOUBLE ACROSTIC 

Two little girls near London dwell. 

More naughty than I like to tell. 

1 

Upon the lawn the hoops are seen: 

The balls are rolling on the green. T ur F 


2 

The Thames is running deep and wide: 

And boats are rowing on the tide. R ive R 

3 

In winter-time, all in a row, 

The happy skaters come and go. I c E 

4 

“Papa!” they cry, “Do let us stay!” 

He does not speak, but says they may. N o D 

5 


“There is a land,” he says, “my dear, 
Which is too hot to skate, I fear.” 


A fric A 



834 


VERSE 


ACROSTIC 

“Are you deaf, Father William!” the young man said, 
“Did you hear what I told you just now? 

“Excuse me for shouting! Don’t waggle your head 
“Like a blundering, sleepy old cow! 

“A little maid dwelling in Wallington Town, 

“Is my friend, so I beg to remark: 

“Do you think she’d be pleased if a book were sent down 
“Entitled ‘The Hunt of the Snark?’ ” 


“Pack it up in brown paper!” the old man cried, 
“And seal it with olive-and-dove. 

“I command you to do it!” he added with pride, 
“Nor forget, my good fellow, to send her beside 
“Easter Greetings, and give her my love.” 

1876. 


ACROSTIC 

(To the Misses Drury.) 

“ M A i d e n s! if you love the tale, 
If you love the Snark, 

Need I urge you, spread the sail, 
Now, while freshly blows the gale, 
In your ocean-barque! 


“English Maidens love renown, 
Enterprise, and fuss!” 
Laughingly those Maidens frown; 
Laughingly, with eyes cast down; 
And they answer thus: 



ACROSTICS AND OTHER VERSES 

"English Maidens fear to roam. 

Much we dread the dark; 

Much we dread what ills might come, 
If we left our English home, 

Even for a Snark!” 


Apr. 6,1876. 


ACROSTIC 

LovE-lighted eyes, that will not start 
At frown of rage or malice! 

Uplifted brow, undaunted heart 
Ready to dine on raspberry-tart 
Along with fairy Alice! 

In scenes as wonderful as if 
She’d flitted in a magic skiff 
Across the sea to Calais: 

Be sure this night, in Fancy’s feast. 
Even till Morning gilds the east, 

Laura will dream of Alice! 

Perchance, as long years onward haste, 
Laura will weary of the taste 
Of Life’s embittered chalice: 

May she, in such a woeful hour, 

Endued with Memory’s mystic power, 
Recall the dreams of Alice! 


835 


June 17, 1876. 



836 


VERSE 


TO M. A. B. 

(To Miss Marion Terry, “Mary Ann Bessie Terry.”) 

The royal MAB, dethroned, discrowned 
By fairy rebels wild, 

Has found a home on English ground, 

And lives an English child. 

I know it, Maiden, when I see 
A fairy-tale upon your knee— 

And note the page that idly lingers 
Beneath those still and listless fingers— 

And mark those dreamy looks that stray 
To some bright vision far away, 

Still seeking, in the pictured story, 

The memory of a vanished glory. 


ACROSTIC 

(To Miss Marion Terry.) 

Maiden, though thy heart may quail 
And thy quivering lip grow pale, 

Read the Bellman's tragic tale! 

Is it life of which it tells? 

Of a pulse that sinks and swells 
Never lacking chime of bells? 

Bells of sorrow, bells of cheer, 

Easter, Christmas, glad New Year, 
Still they sound, afar, anear. 

So may Life’s sweet bells for thee, 

In the summers yet to be, 

Evermore make melody! 

Aug. 15, 1876. 



ACROSTICS AND OTHER VERSES 837 


MADRIGAL 

(To Miss May Forshall.) 

He shouts amain, he shouts again, 

(Her brother, fierce, as bluff King Hal), 

“I tell you flat, I shall do that!” 

She softly whispers “ ‘May’ for ‘shall’!” 

He wistful sighed one eventide 

(Her friend, that made this Madrigal), 
"And shall I kiss you, pretty Miss!” 

Smiling she answered " ‘May’ for ‘shall’!” 

With eager eyes my reader cries, 

"Your friend must be indeed a val¬ 
uable child, so sweet, so mild! 

What do you call her?” "May For shall.” 

Dec. 24,1877. 


LOVE AMONG THE ROSES 

ACROSTIC 

"Seek ye Love, ye fairy-sprites? 

Ask where reddest roses grow. 

Rosy fancies he invites, 

And in roses he delights, 

Have ye found him?” “No!” 

"Seek again, and find the boy 

In Childhood's heart, so pure and clear.” 
Now the fairies leap for joy, 

Crying, "Love is here!” 



838 


VERSE 


“Love has found his proper nest; 

And we guard him while he dozes 
In a dream of peace and rest 
Rosier than roses.’’ 


Jan. 3, 1878. 


TWO POEMS TO RACHEL DANIEL 

I 

"Oh pudgy podgy pup! 

Why did they wake you up? 

Those crude nocturnal yells 
Are not like silver bells: 

Nor ever would recall 
Sweet Music’s ‘dying fall’. 

They rather bring to mind 
The bitter winter wind 
Through keyholes shrieking shrilly. 
When nights are dark and chilly: 

Or like some dire duett, 

Or quarrelsome quartette, 

Of cats who chant their joys 
With execrable noise, 

And murder Time and Tune 
To vex the patient Moon!” 

Nov. 1880. 


II 

FOR “THE GARLAND OF RACHEL” (l88l) 

What hand may wreathe thy natal crown, 
O tiny tender Spirit-blossom, 

That out of Heaven hast fluttered down 
Into this Earth’s cold bosom? 



ACROSTICS AND OTHER VERSES 


And how shall mortal bard aspire— 

All sin-begrimed and sorrow-laden— 

To welcome, with the Seraph-choir, 

A pure and perfect Maiden? 

Are not God’s minstrels ever near, 

Flooding with joy the woodland mazes? 

Which shall we summon, Baby dear, 

To carol forth thy praises? 

With sweet sad song the Nightingale 

May soothe the broken hearts that languish 

Where graves are green—the orphans' wail. 
The widow’s lonely anguish: 

The Turtle-dove with amorous coo 
May chide the blushing maid that lingers 

To twine her bridal wreath anew 
With weak and trembling fingers: 

But human loves and human woes 

Would dim the radiance of thy glory— 

Only the Lark such music knows 
As fits thy stainless story. 

The world may listen as it will— 

She recks not, to the skies up-springing: 

Beyond our ken she singeth still 
For very joy of singing. 


THE LYCEUM 

“It is the lawyer’s daughter, 

And she is grown so dear, so dear. 
She costs me, in one evening. 

The income of a year! 



84O VERSE 

‘You ca’n’t have children’s love’, she cried, 
‘Unless you choose to fee ’em!’ 

‘And what’s your fee, child?’ I replied. 

She simply said- 

“We saw ‘The Cup’.” I hoped she’d say, 

“I’m grateful to you, very.” 

She murmured, as she turned away, 

“That lovely [Ellen Terry.] 

“Compared with her, the rest”, she cried, 
“Are just like two or three um- 
“berellas standing side by side! 

“Oh, gem of- 

“We saw Two Brothers. I confess 
To me they seemed one man. 

"Now which is which, child? Can you guess?” 

She cried, “A-course I can!” 

Bad puns like this I always dread, 

And am resolved to flee ’em. 

And so I left her there, and fled; 

She lives at- 

1881. 


ACROSTIC 

Around my lonely hearth to-night, 
Ghostlike the shadows wander: 

Now here, now there, a childish sprite, 
Earthborn and yet as angel bright, 
Seems near me as I ponder. 

Gaily she shouts: the laughing air 
'Echoes her note of gladness— 

Or bends herself with earnest care 
Round fairy-fortress to prepare 
Grim battlement or turret-stair— 

In childhood’s merry madness! 



ACROSTICS AN D OTHER VERSES 841 

New raptures still hath youth in store. 

Age may but fondly cherish 
Half-faded memories of yore— 

Up, craven heart! repine no more! 

Love stretches hands from shore to shore: 

Love is, and shall not perish! 


DREAMLAND 

(Verses written to the dream-music written down by C. E. 
Hutchinson, of Brasenose College.) 

When midnight mists are creeping, 

And all the land is sleeping. 

Around me tread the mighty dead, 

And slowly pass away. 

Lo, warriors, saints, and sages, 

From out the vanished ages. 

With solemn pace and reverend face 
Appear and pass away. 

The blaze of noonday splendour, 

The twilight soft and tender, 

May charm the eye: yet they shall die, 

Shall die and pass away. 

But here, in Dreamland’s centre, 

No spoiler’s hand may enter, 

These visions fair, this radiance rare, 

Shall never pass away. 

I see the shadows falling, 

The forms of old recalling; 

Around me tread the might)' dead, 

And slowly pass away. 


1882. 



842 


VERSE 


TO MY CHILD-FRIEND 

DEDICATION TO "THE GAME OF LOGIC” 

I charm in vain: for never again, 

All keenly as my glance I bend, 

Will Memory, goddess coy, 

Embody for my j oy 
Departed days, nor let me gaze 
On thee, my Fairy Friend! 

Yet could thy face, in mystic grace, 

A moment smile on me, 'twould send 
Far-darting rays of light 
From Heaven athwart the night, 

By which to read in very deed 
Thy spirit, sweetest Friend! 

So may the stream of Life’s long dream 
Flow gently onward to its end, 

With many a floweret gay, 

A-down its willowy way: 

May no sigh vex, no care perplex, 

My loving little Friend! 

1886. 


A RIDDLE 

(To Miss Gaynor Simpson.) 

My first lends his aid when I plunge into trade: 

My second in jollifications: 

My whole, laid on thinnish, imparts a neat finish 
To pictorial representations. 

Answer. Copal. 



ACROSTICS AND OTHER VERSES 843 


A LIMERICK 

(To Miss Vera Beringer.) 

There was a young lady of station, 

“I love man” was her sole exclamation; 
But when men cried, “You flatter,” 
She replied, “Oh! no matter, 

Isle of Man is the true explanation.” 


RHYME? AND REASON? 

(To Miss Emmie Drury.) 

"I'M EMInent in RHYME!” she said. 

“I make WRY Mouths of RYE-Meal gruel!” 
The Poet smiled, and shook his head: 

"Is REASON, then, the missing jewel?” 


A NURSERY DARLING 

DEDICATION TO THE NURSERY “ALICE*', 1889 

A Mother's breast: 

Safe refuge from her childish fears, 

From childish troubles, childish tears, 

Mists that enshroud her dawning years! 

See how in sleep she seems to sing 
A voiceless psalm—-an offering 
Raised, to the glory of her King, 

In Love: for Love is Rest. 



VERSE 


A Darling’s kiss: 

Dearest of all the signs that fleet 
From lips that lovingly repeat 
Again, again, their message sweet! 

Full to the brim with girlish glee, 

A child, a very child is she, 

Whose dream of Heaven is still to be 
At Home: for Home is Bliss. 

MAGGIE’S VISIT TO OXFORD 

(June 9th to 13th, 1889) 

(Written for Maggie Bowman.) 

When Maggie once to Oxford came. 
On tour as "Booties’ Baby”, 

She said, "I’ll see this place of fame, 
However dull the day be.” 

So with her friend she visited 
The sights that it was rich in: 

And first of all she popped her head 
Inside the Christ Church kitchen. 

The Cooks around that little child 
Stood waiting in a ring: 

And every time that Maggie smiled 
Those Cooks began to sing— 

Shouting the Battle-cry of Freedom! 

“Roast, boil and bake, 

For Maggie’s sake: 

Bring cutlets fine 
For her to dine, 

Meringues so sweet 
For her to eat— 

For Maggie may be 
Booties’ Baby!” 



ACROSTICS AND OTHER VERSES 845 

Then hand in hand in pleasant talk 
They wandered and admired 

The Hall, Cathedral and Broad Walk, 

Till Maggie’s feet were tired: 

To Worcester Garden next they strolled. 
Admired its quiet lake: 

Then to St. John, a college old, 

Their devious way they take. 

In idle mood they sauntered round 
Its lawn so green and flat, 

And in that garden Maggie found 
A lovely Pussy-Cat! 

A quarter of an hour they spent 
In wandering to and fro: 

And everywhere that Maggie went, 

The Cat was sure to go— 

Shouting the Battle-cry of Freedom! 

“Maiow! Maiow! 

Come, make your bow, 

Take off your hats, 

Ye Pussy-Cats! 

And purr and purr. 

To welcome her, 

For Maggie may be 
Booties’ Baby!” 

So back to Christ Church, not too late 
For them to go and see 

A Christ Church undergraduate, 

Who gave them cakes and tea. 

Next day she entered with her guide 
The garden called “Botanic”, 

And there a fierce Wild Boar she spied. 

Enough to cause a panic: 



VERSE 


But Maggie didn’t mind, not she, 

She would have faced, alone, 

That fierce wild boar, because, you see, 

The thing was made of stone. 

On Magdalen walls they saw a face 
That filled her with delight, 

A giant face, that made grimace 
And grinned with all its might. 

A little friend, industrious. 

Pulled upwards all the while 
The corner of its mouth, and thus 
He helped that face to smile! 

"How nice”, thought Maggie, "it would be 
If 7 could have a friend 
To do that very thing for me 
And make my mouth turn up with glee, 

By pulling at one end. ’ ’ 

In Magdalen Park the deer are wild 
With joy, that Maggie brings 
Some bread a friend had given the child, 
To feed the pretty things. 

They flock round Maggie without fear: 

They breakfast and they lunch, 

They dine, they sup, those happy deer— 
Still, as they munch and munch, 
Shouting the Battle-cry of Freedom! 

"Yes, Deer are we, 

And dear is she! 

We love this child 
So sweet and mild: 



ACROSTICS AND OTHER VERSES 

We all rejoice 
At Maggie’s voice: 

We all are fed 

With Maggie's bread . . . 

For Maggie may be 
Booties’ Baby!” 

They met a Bishop on their way . . . 

A Bishop large as life. 

With loving smile that seemed to say 
“Will Maggie be my wife?” 

Maggie thought not, because, you see, 
She was so very young, 

And he was old as old could be . . . 

So Maggie held her tongue. 

“My Lord, she’s Booties’ Baby, we 
Are going up and down”, 

Her friend explained, “that she may see 
The sights of Oxford Town.” 

"Now say what kind of place it is,” 

The Bishop gaily cried. 

"The best place in the Provinces!” 

That little maid replied. 

Away, next morning, Maggie went 
From Oxford town: but yet 
The happy hours she there had spent 
She could not soon forget. 

The train is gone, it rumbles on: 

The engine-whistle scieams; 

But Maggie deep in rosy sleep . . . 

And softly in her dreams, 

Whispers the Battle-cry of Freedom. 


847 



8 4 8 


VERSE 


“Oxford, good-bye!’’ 
She seems to sigh. 
“You dear old City, 
With gardens pretty, 
And lanes and flowers, 
And college-towers, 
And Tom’s great Bell. 
F arewell—farewell: 
For Maggie may be 
Booties’ Baby!” 


MAGGIE B- 

(To Maggie Bowman.) 

Written by Maggie B- 
Bought by me: 

A present to Maggie B— 
Sent by me: 

But who can Maggie be? 
Answered by me: 
“She is she.” 


Aug. 13, 1891. 



THREE SUNSETS 
AND OTHER POEMS 

THREE SUNSETS 

H e saw her once, and in the glance, 

A moment’s glance of meeting eyes, 

His heart stood still in sudden trance: 

He trembled with a sweet surprise— 

All in the waning light she stood, 

The star of perfect womanhood. 

That summer-eve his heart was light: 

With lighter step he trod the ground: 

And life was fairer in his sight, 

And music was in every sound: 

He blessed the world where there could be 
So beautiful a thing as she. 

There once again, as evening fell 
And stars were peering overhead, 

Two lovers met to bid farewell: 

The western sun gleamed faint and red, 
Lost in a drift of purple cloud 
That wrapped him like a funeral-shroud. 

Long time the memory of that night— 

The hand that clasped, the lips that kissed, 
The form that faded from his sight 

Slow sinking through the tearful mist— 

In dreamy music seemed to roll 
Through the dark chambers of his soul. 

So after many years he came 
A wanderer from a distant shore: 

The street, the house, were still the same, 

But those he sought were there no more: 

l»c® 



VERSE 


His burning words, his hopes and fears, 
Unheeded fell on alien ears. 

Only the children from their play 
Would pause the mournful tale to hear, 
Shrinking in half-alarm away, 

Or, step by step, would venture near 
To touch with timid curious hands 
That strange wild man from other lands.’ 

He sat beside the busy street, 

There, where he last had seen her face; 
And thronging memories, bitter-sweet, 
Seemed yet to haunt the ancient place: 
Her footfall ever floated near: 

Her voice was ever in his ear. 

He sometimes, as the daylight waned 
And evening mists began to roll. 

In half-soliloquy complained 

Of that black shadow on his soul, 

And blindly fanned, with cruel care, 

The ashes of a vain despair. 

The summer fled: the lonely man 
Still lingered out the lessening days: 
Still, as the night drew on, would scan 
Each passing face with closer gaze— 
Till, sick at heart, he turned away, 

And sighed “She will not come to-day.” 

So by degrees his spirit bent 
To mock its own despairing cry, 

In stern self-torture to invent 
New luxuries of agony, 

And people all the vacant space 
With visions of her perfect face. 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 851 

Then for a moment she was nigh, 

He heard no step, but she was there; 

As if an angel suddenly 

Were bodied from the viewless air, 

And all her fine ethereal frame 
Should fade as swiftly as it came. 

So, half in fancy’s sunny trance, 

And half in misery’s aching void, 

With set and stony countenance 
His bitter being he enjoyed, 

And thrust for ever from his mind 
The happiness he could not find. 

As when the wretch, in lonely room, 

To selfish death is madly hurled, 

The glamour of that fatal fume 

Shuts out the wholesome living world— 

So all his manhood’s strength and pride 
One sickly dream had swept aside. 

Yea, brother, and we passed him there, 

But yesterday, in merry mood, 

And marvelled at the lordly air 
That shamed his beggar’s attitude, 

Nor heeded that ourselves might be 
Wretches as desperate as he; 

Who let the thought of bliss denied 
Make havoc of our life and powers, 

And pine, in solitary pride, 

For peace that never shall be ours, 

Because we will not work and wait 
In trustful patience for our fate. 

And so it chanced once more that she 
Came by the old familiar spot: 

The face he would have died to see 
Bent o’er him, and he knew it not; 



852 VERSE 

Too rapt in selfish grief to hear, 

Even when happiness was near. 

And pity filled her gentle breast 

For him that would not stir nor speak, 
The dying crimson of the west, 

That faintly tinged his haggard cheek, 
Fell on her as she stood, and shed 
A glory round the patient head. 

Ah, let him wake! The moments fly: 

This awful tryst may be the last. 

And see, the tear, that dimmed her eye, 
Had fallen on him ere she passed— 
She passed: the crimson paled to gray: 
And hope departed with the day. 

The heavy hours of night went by. 

And silence quickened into sound, 
And light slid up the eastern sky, 

And life began its daily round— 

But light and life for him were fled: 

His name was numbered with the dead. 

Nov. 1861. 


THE PATH OF ROSES 

(.Florence Nightingale was at the height of her fame when this 
was written, after the Crimean War.) 

I n the dark silence of an ancient room, 

Whose one tall window fronted to the West, 

Where, through laced tendrils of a hanging vine, 

The sunset-glow was fading into night, 

Sat a pale Lady, resting weary hands 
Upon a great clasped volume, and her face 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 853 

Within her hands. Not as in rest she bowed, 

But large hot tears were coursing down her cheek. 

And her low-panted sobs broke awefully 
Upon the sleeping echoes of the night. 

Soon she unclasp’d the volume once again, 

And read the words in tone of agony, 

As in self-torture, weeping as she read: 

“He crowns the glory of his race: 

Heprayeth but in some fit place 
To meet his foeman face to face: 

“And, battling for the True, the Right, 

From ruddy dawn to purple night, 

T 0 perish in the midmost fight: 

“Where hearts are fierce and hands are strong. 

Where peals the bugle loud and long, 

Where blood is dropping in the throng: 

“Still, with a dim and glazing eye, 

To watch the tide of victory, 

To hear in death the battle-cry: 

“Then, gathered grandly to his grave, 

To rest among the true and brave, 

In holy ground, where yew-trees wave: 

“Where, from church-windows sculptured fair, 

Float out upon the evening air 
The note of praise, the voice of prayer: 

“Where no vain marble mockery 
Insults with loud and boastful lie 
The simple soldier’s memory: 

“ Where sometimes little children go, 

And read, in whisper’d accent slow, 

The name of him who sleeps below.” 



854 VERSE 

Her voice died out: like one in dreams she sat. 

“Alas!” she sighed. “For what can Woman do? 

Her life is aimless, and her death unknown: 

Hemmed in by social forms she pines in vain. 

Man has his work, but what can Woman do?” 

And answer came there from the creeping gloom, 
The creeping gloom that settled into night: 

“Peace! For thy lot is other than a man's: 

His is a path of thorns: he beats them down: 

He faces death: he wrestles with despair. 

Thine is of roses, to adorn and cheer 

His lonely life, and hide the thorns in flowers.” 

She spake again: in bitter tone she spake: 

“Aye, as a toy, the puppet of an hour, 

Or a fair posy, newly plucked at morn, 

But flung aside and withered ere the night.” 

And answer came there from the creeping gloom, 
The creeping gloom that blackened into night: 

“So shalt thou be the lamp to light his path, 

What time the shades of sorrow close around.” 

And, so it seemed to her, an awful light 
Pierced slowly through the darkness, orbed, and grew, 
Until all passed away—the ancient room— 

The sunlight dying through the trellised vine— 

The one tall window—all had passed away, 

And she was standing on the mighty hills. 

Beneath, around, and far as eye could see, 

Squadron on squadron, stretched opposing hosts, 
Ranked as for battle, mute and motionless. 

Anon a distant thunder shook the ground, 

The tramp of horses, and a troop shot by— 

Plunged headlong in that living sea of men— 

Plunged to their death: back from that fatal field 
A scattered handful, fighting hard for life, 

Broke through the serried lines; but, as she gazed, 
They shrank and melted, and their forms grew thin— 
Grew pale as ghosts when the first morning ray 
Dawns from the East—the trumpet’s brazen blare 


THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 855 

Died into silence—and the vision passed— 

Passed to a room where sick and dying lay 
In long, sad line—there brooded Fear and Pain— 
Darkness was there, the shade of Azrael’s wing. 

But there was one that ever, to and fro, 

Moved with light footfall: purely calm her face, 

And those deep steadfast eyes that starred the gloom: 
Still, as she went, she ministered to each 
Comfort and counsel; cooled the fevered brow 
With softest touch, and in the listening ear 
Of the pale sufferer whispered words of peace. 

That dying warrior, gazing as she passed, 

Clasped his thin hands and blessed her. Bless her too, 
Thou, who didst bless the merciful of old! 

So prayed the Lady, watching tearfully 
Her gentle moving onward, till the night 
Had veiled her wholly, and the vision passed. 

Then once again the solemn whisper came: 

“So in the darkest path of man’s despair, 

Where War and Terror shake the troubled earth, 

Lies woman’s mission; with unblenching brow 
To pass through scenes of horror and affright 
Where men grow sick and tremble: unto her 
All things are sanctified, for all are good. 

Nothing so mean, but shall deserve her care: 

Nothing so great, but she may bear her part. 

No life is vain: each hath his place assigned: 

Do thou thy task, and leave the rest to God.” 

And there was silence, but the Lady made 
No answer, save one deeply-breathed “Amen”. 

And she arose, and ir* that darkening room 
Stood lonely as a spirit of the night— 

Stood calm and fearless in the gathered night— 

And raised her eyes to heaven. There were tears 
Upon her face, but in her heart was peace. 

Peace that the world nor gives nor takes away! 

April 10,1856. 



856 


VERSE 


THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH 

Hark, said the dying man, and sighed, 

To that complaining tone— 

Like sprite condemned, each eventide, 

To walk the world alone. 

At sunset, when the air is still, 

I hear it creep from yonder hill: 

It breathes upon me, dead and chill, 

A moment, and is gone. 

My son, it minds me of a day 
Left half a life behind, 

That I have prayed to put away 
For ever from my mind. 

But bitter memory will not die: 

It haunts my soul when none is nigh: 

I hear its whisper in the sigh 
Of that complaining wind. 

And now in death my soul is fain 
To tell the tale of fear 
That hidden in my breast hath lain 
Through many a weary year: 

Yet time would fail to utter all— 

The evil spells that held me thrall, 

And thrust my life from fall to fall, 

Thou needest not to hear. 

The spells that bound me with a chain. 

Sin’s stern behests to do, 

Till Pleasure’s self, invoked in vain, 

A heavy burden grew— 

Till from my spirit’s fevered eye, 

A hunted thing, I seemed to fly 
Through the dark woods that underlie 
Yon mountain-range of blue. 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 

Deep in those woods I found a vale 
No sunlight visiteth. 

Nor star, nor wandering moonbeam pale; 

Where never comes the breath 
Of summer-breeze—there in mine ear, 

Even as I lingered half in fear, 

I heard a whisper, cold and clear, 

“That is the gate of Death. 

“O bitter is it to abide 
In weariness alway: 

At dawn to sigh for eventide, 

At eventide for day. 

Thy noon hath fled: thy sun hath shone: 

The brightness of thy day is gone: 

What need to lag and linger on 
Till life be cold and gray? 

“0 well," it said, “beneath yon pool, 

In some still cavern deep, 

The fevered brain might slumber cool, 

The eyes forget to weep: 

Within that goblet’s mystic rim 
Are draughts of healing, stored for him 
Whose heart is sick, whose sight is dim, 

Who prayeth but to sleep!’’ 

The evening-breeze went moaning by. 

Like mourner for the dead, 

And stirred, with shrill complaining sigh, 
The tree-tops overhead: 

My guardian-angel seemed to stand 
And mutely wave a warning hand— 

With sudden terror all unmanned, 

I turned myself and fled! 

A cottage-gate stood open wide: 

Soft fell the dying ray 



VERSE 


On two fair children, side by side, 

That rested from their play— 

Together bent the earnest head, 

As ever and anon they read 
From one dear Book: the words they said 
Come back to me to-day. 

Like twin cascades on mountain-stair 
Together wandered down 
The ripples of the golden hair, 

The ripples of the brown: 

While, through the tangled silken haze, 
Blue eyes looked forth in eager gaze, 
More starlike than the gems that blaze 
About a monarch’s crown. 

My son, there comes to each an hour 
When sinks the spirit’s pride— 

When weary hands forget their power 
The strokes of death to guide: ' 

In such a moment, warriors say, 

A word the panic-rout may stay, 

A sudden charge redeem the day 
And turn the living tide. 

I could not see, for blinding tears, 

The glories of the west: 

A heavenly music filled mine ears, 

A heavenly peace my breast. 

“Come unto Me, come unto Me— 

All ye that labour, unto Me— 

Ye heavy-laden, come to Me— 

And I will give you rest.” 

The night drew onwards: thin and blue 
The evening mists arise 
To bathe the thirsty land in dew, 

As erst in Paradise— 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 859 

While, over silent field and town, 

The deep blue vault of heaven looked down; 

Not, as of old, in angry frown. 

But bright with angels’ eyes. 


Blest day! Then first I heard the voice 
That since hath oft beguiled 
These eyes from tears, and bid rejoice 
This heart with anguish wild— 

Thy mother, boy, thou hast not known; 
So soon she left me here to moan— 

Left me to weep and watch, alone, 

Our one beloved child. 


Though, parted from my aching sight, 
Like homeward-speeding dove, 

She passed into the perfect light 
That floods the world above; 

Yet our twin spirits, well I know— 
Though one abide in pain below— 
Love, as in summers long ago, 

And evermore shall love. 


So with a glad and patient heart 
I move toward mine end: 

The streams, that flow awhile apart. 
Shall both in ocean blend. 

I dare not weep: I can but bless 
The Love that pitied my distress, 
And lent me, in Life’s wilderness, 

So sweet and true a friend. 


But if there be—O if there be 
A truth in what they say, 
That angel-forms we cannot see 
Go with us on our way; 



86 o 


VERSE 


Then surely she is with me here, 

I dimly feel her spirit near— 

The morning-mists grow thin and clear, 
And Death brings in the Day. 

April 1868. 


SOLITUDE 

I love the stillness of the wood: 

I love the music of the rill: 

I love to couch in pensive mood 
Upon some silent hill. 

Scarce heard, beneath yon arching trees, 
The silver-crested ripples pass; 

And, like a mimic brook, the breeze 
Whispers among the grass. 

Here from the world I win release. 

Nor scorn of men, nor footstep rude. 

Break in to mar the holy peace 
Of this great solitude. 

Here may the silent tears I weep 
Lull the vexed spirit into rest, 

As infants sob themselves to sleep 
Upon a mother’s breast. 

But when the bitter hour is gone, 

And the keen throbbing pangs are still. 

Oh, sweetest then to couch alone 
Upon some silent hill! 

To live in joys that once have been, 

To put the cold world out of sight, 

And deck life's drear and barren scene 
With hues of rainbow-light. 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 86l 


For what to man the gift of breath, 

If sorrow be his lot below; 

If all the day that ends in death 
Be dark with clouds of woe? 

Shall the poor transport of an hour 
Repay long years of sore distress— 

The fragrance of a lonely flower 
Make glad the wilderness? 

Ye golden hours of Life’s young spring, 
Of innocence, of love and truth! 

Bright, beyond all imagining, 

Thou fairy-dream of youth! 

I’d give all wealth that years have piled, 
The slow result of Life’s decay, 

To be once more a little child 
For one bright summer-day. 

March 16, 1853. 


BEATRICE 

I n her eyes is the living light 
Of a wanderer to earth 
From a far celestial height: 

Summers five are all the span— 
Summers five since Time began 
To veil in mists of human night 
A shining angel-birth. 

Does an angel look from her eyes? 

Will she suddenly spring away, 

And soar to her home in the skies? 
Beatrice! Blessing and blessed to be! 
Beatrice! Still, as I gaze on thee, 
Visions of two sweet maids arise, 
Whose life was of yesterday: 



862 


VERSE 


Of a Beatrice pale and stern, 

With the lips of a dumb despair, 

With the innocent eyes that yearn— 

Yearn for the young sweet hours of life, 

Far from sorrow and far from strife, 

For the happy summers, that never return, 

When the world seemed good and fair: 

Of a Beatrice glorious, bright— 

Of a sainted, ethereal maid, 

Whose blue eyes are deep fountains of light, 
Cheering the poet that broodeth apart, 

Filling with gladness his desolate heart, 

Like the moon when she shines thro’ a cloudless 
night 

On a world of silence and shade. 

And the visions waver and faint, 

And the visions vanish away 
That my fancy delighted to paint— 

She is here at my side, a living child, 

With the glowing cheek and the tresses wild, 

Nor death-pale martyr, nor radiant saint, 

Yet stainless and bright as they. 

For I think, if a grim wild beast 
Were to come from his charnel-cave, 

From his jungle-home in the East— 

Stealthily creeping with bated breath, 

Stealthily creeping with eyes of death— 

He would all forget his dream of the feast, 

And crouch at her feet a slave. 

She would twine her hand in his mane: 

She would prattle in silvery tone, 

Like the tinkle of summer-rain— 

Questioning him with her laughing eyes, 
Questioning him with a glad surprise. 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 863 

Till she caught from those fierce eyes again 
The love that lit her own. 

And be sure, if a savage heart, 

In a mask of human guise. 

Were to come on her here apart— 

Bound for-a dark and a deadly deed, 

Hurrying past with pitiless speed— 

He would suddenly falter and guiltily start 
At the glance of her pure blue eyes. 

Nay, be sure, if an angel fair, 

A bright seraph undefiled, 

Were to stoop from the trackless air, 

Fain would she linger in glad amaze— 

Lovingly linger to ponder and gaze, 

With a sister’s love and a sister’s care, 

On the happy, innocent child. 

Dec. 4, 1862. 


STOLEN WATERS 

The light was faint, and soft the air 
That breathed around the place; 

And she was lithe, and tall, and fair, 
And with a wayward grace 
Her queenly head she bare. 

With glowing cheek, with gleaming eye, 
She met me on the way: 

My spirit owned the witchery 
Within her smile that lay: 

I followed her, I know not why. 

The trees were thick with many a fruit, 
The grass with many a flower: 

My soul was dead, my tongue was mute, 
In that accursed hour. 



864 


VERSE 


And, in my dream, with silvery voice, 

She said, or seemed to say, 

"Youth is the season to rejoice”— 

I could not choose but stay: 

I could not say her nay. 

She plucked a branch above her head, 

With rarest fruitage laden: 

"Drink of the juice, Sir Knight,” she said: 

" 'Tis good for knight and maiden.” 

Oh, blind mine eye that would not trace— 
Oh, deaf mine ear that would not heed— 
The mocking smile upon her face, 

The mocking voice of greed! 

I drank the juice; and straightway felt 
A fire within my brain: 

My soul within me seemed to melt 
In sweet delirious pain. 

"Sweet is the stolen draught,” she said: 

"Hath sweetness stint or measure? 
Pleasant the secret hoard of bread: 

What bars us from our pleasure?” 

"Yea, take we pleasure while we may,” 

I heard myself replying. 

In the red sunset, far away, 

My happier life was dying: 

My heart was sad, my voice was gay. 

And unawares, I knew not how, 

I kissed her dainty finger-tips, 

I kissed her on the lily brow, 

I kissed her on the false, false lips— 

That burning kiss, I feel it now! 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 865 

“True love gives true love of the best: 

Then take”, I cried, “my heart to thee!” 

The very heart from out my breast 
I plucked, I gave it willingly: 

Her very heart she gave to me— 

Then died the glory from the west. 

In the gray light I saw her face, 

And it was withered, old, and gray; 

The flowers were fading in their place, 

Were fading with the fading day. 

Forth from her, like a hunted deer, 

Through all that ghastly night I fled, 

And still behind me seemed to hear 
Her fierce unflagging tread; 

And scarce drew breath for fear. 

Yet marked I well how strangely seemed 
The heart within my breast to sleep: 

Silent it lay, or so I dreamed, 

With never a throb or leap. 

For hers was now my heart, she said, 

The heart that once had been mine own: 

And in my breast I bore instead 
A cold, cold heart of stone. 

So grew the morning overhead. 

The sun shot downward through the trees 
His old familiar flame: 

All ancient sounds upon the breeze 
From copse and meadow came— 

But I was not the same. 

They call me mad: I smile, I weep, 

Uncaring how or why: 



VERSE 


Yea, when one’s heart is laid asleep, 
What better than to die? 

So that the grave be dark and deep. 

To die! To die? And yet, methinks, 

I drink of life, to-day, 

Deep as the thirsty traveler drinks 
Of fountain by the way: 

My voice is sad, my heart is gay. 


When yestereve was on the wane, 

I heard a clear voice singing 
So sweetly that, like summer-rain, 

My happy tears came springing: 

My human heart returned again. 

“A rosy child, 

Sitting and singing, in a garden fair, 

The joy of hearing, seeing, 

The simple joy of being — 

Or twining rosebuds in the golden hair 
That ripples free and wild. 

“ A sweet pale child — 
Wearily looking to the purple West — 
Waiting the great For-ever 
That suddenly shall sever 
The cruel chains that hold her from her rest — 
By earth-joys unbeguiled. 

“An angel-child — 

Gazing with living eyes on a dead face: 

The mortal form forsaken, 

That none may now awaken, 

That lieth painless, moveless in her place, 

As though in death she smiled! 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 
“Be as a child — 

So shalt thou sing for very joy of breath —- 
So shalt thou wait thy dying. 

In holy transport lying — 

So pass rejoicing through the gate of death, 
In garment undefiled.” 

Then call me what they will, I know 
That now my soul is glad: 

If this be madness, better so. 

Far better to be mad, 

Weeping or smiling as I go. 

For if I weep, it is that now 
I see how deep a loss is mine, 

And feel how brightly round my brow 
The coronal might shine, 

Had I but kept mine early vow: 

And if I smile, it is that now 
I see the promise of the years— 

The garland waiting for my brow, 

That must be won with tears, 

With pain—with death—I care not how. 

May 9, 1862. 


THE WILLOW-TREE 

The morn was bright, the steeds were light, 
The wedding guests were gay: 

Young Ellen stood within the wood 
And watched them pass away. 

She scarcely saw the gallant train: 

The tear-drop dimmed her e’e: 

Unheard the maiden did complain 
Beneath the Willow-Tree. 


867 



868 


VERSE 


“Oh, Robin, thou didst love me well, 
Till, on a bitter day, 

She came, the Lady Isabel, 

And stole thy heart away. 

My tears are vain: I live again 
In days that used to be, 

When I could meet thy welcome feet 
Beneath the Willow-Tree. 

“Oh, Willow gray, I may not stay 
Till Spring renew thy leaf; 

But I will hide myself away, 

And nurse a lonely grief. 

It shall not dim Life’s joy for him: 

My tears he shall not see: 

While he is by, I’ll come not nigh 
My weeping Willow-Tree. 

“But when I die, oh, let me lie 
Beneath thy loving shade, 

That he may loiter careless by, 

Where I am lowlv laid. 

And let the white white marble tell, 

If he should stoop to see, 

‘Here lies a maid that loved thee well, 
Beneath the Willow-Tree.’ ” 


ONLY A WOMAN’S HAIR 

[“After the death of Dean Swift, there was found among 
his papers a small packet containing a single lock of hair and 
inscribed with the above words.”] 

“Only a woman’s hair!” Fling it aside! 

A bubble on Life’s mighty stream: 

Heed it not, man, but watch the broadening tide 
Bright with the western beam. 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 869 

Nay! In those words there rings from other years 
The echo of a long low cry, 

Where a proud spirit wrestles with its tears 
In loneliest agony. 

And, as I touch that lock, strange visions throng 
Upon my soul with dreamy grace— 

Of woman's hair, the theme of poet’s song 
In every time and place. 

A child’s bright tresses, by the breezes kissed 
To sweet disorder as she flies, 

Veiling, beneath a cloud of golden mist, 

Flushed cheek and laughing eyes— 

Or fringing, like a shadow, raven-black. 

The glory of a queen-like face— 

Or from a gipsy’s sunny brow tossed back 
In wild and wanton grace— 

Or crown-like on the hoary head of Age, 

Whose tale of life is well-nigh told— 

Or, last, in dreams I make my pilgrimage 
To Bethany of old. 

I see the feast—the purple and the gold; 

The gathering crowd of Pharisees, 

Whose scornful eyes are centred to behold 
Yon woman on her knees. 

The stifled sob rings strangely on mine ears. 
Wrung from the depth of sin’s despair: 

And still she bathes the sacred feet with tears, 

And wipes them with her hair. 

He scorned not then the simple loving deed 
Of her, the lowest and the last; 

Then scorn not thou, but use with earnest heed 
This relic of the past. 



870 


VERSE 


The eyes that loved it once no longer wake: 

So lay it by with reverent care— 
Touching it tenderly for sorrow’s sake— 

It is a woman’s hair. 

Feb. 17, 1862. 


THE SAILOR’S WIFE 

See ! There are tears upon her face— 
Tears newly shed, and scarcely dried: 

Close, in an agonized embrace, 

She clasps the infant at her side. 

Peace dwells in those soft-lidded eyes, 
Those parted lips that faintly smile— 

Peace, the foretaste of Paradise, 

In heart too young for care or guile. 

No peace that mother’s features wear; 

But quivering lip, and knotted brow, 

And broken mutterings, all declare 

The fearful dream that haunts her now, 

The storm-wind, rushing through the sky, 
Wails from the depths of cloudy space; 

Shrill, piercing as the seaman’s cry 
When death and he are face to face. 

Familiar tones are in the gale: 

They ring upon her startled ear: 

And quick and low she pants the tale 
That tells of agony and fear: 

“Still that phantom-ship is nigh— 

With a vexed and life-like motion, 

All beneath an angry sky, 

Rocking on an angry ocean. 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 87I 

“Round the straining mast and shrouds 
Throng the spirits of the storm: 

Darkly seen through driving clouds, 

Bends each gaunt and ghastly form. 

“See! The good ship yields at last! 

Dumbly yields, and fights no more; 

Driving, in the frantic blast, 

Headlong on the fatal shore. 

“Hark! I hear her battered side, 

With a low and sullen shock, 

Dashed, amid the foaming tide, 

Full upon a sunken rock. 

“His face shines out against the sky, 

Like a ghost, so cold and white; 

With a dead despairing eye 

Gazing through the gathered night. 

“Is he watching, through the dark, 

Where a mocking ghostly hand 

Points a faint and feeble spark 
Glimmering from the distant land? 

“Sees he, in this hour of dread, 

Hearth and home and wife and child? 

Loved ones who, in summers fled. 

Clung to him and wept and smiled? 

“Reeling sinks the fated bark 
To her tomb beneath the wave: 

Must he perish in the dark— 

Not a hand stretched out to save? 

“See the spirits, how they crowd! 

Watching death with eyes that burn! 

Waves rush in-” she shrieks aloud, 

Ere her waking sense return. 



872 


VERSE 


The storm is gone: the skies are clear: 

Hush’d is that bitter cry of pain: 

The only sound, that meets her ear, 

The heaving of the sullen main. 

Though heaviness endure the night, 

Yet joy shall come with break of day: 
She shudders with a strange delight— 

The fearful dream is pass’d away. 

She wakes: the gray dawn streaks the dark: 

With early song the copses ring: 

Far off she hears the watch-dog bark 
A joyful bark of welcoming! 

Feb. 23, 1857. 


AFTER THREE DAYS 

[“Written after seeing Holman Hunt’s picture, The Find- 
ing of Christ in the Temple.”'] 

I stood within the gate 
Of a great temple, ’mid the living stream 
Of worshippers that thronged its regal state 
Fair-pictured in my dream. 

Jewels and gold were there; 

And floors of marble lent a crystal sheen 
To body forth, as in a lower air, 

The wonders of the scene. 

Such wild and lavish grace 
Had whispers in it of a coming doom; 

As richest flowers lie strown about the face 
Of her that waits the tomb. 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 873 

The wisest of the land 

Had gathered there, three solemn trysting-days, 

For high debate: men stood on either hand 
To listen and to gaze. 

The aged brows were bent, 

Bent to a frown, half thought, and half annoy, 

That all their stores of subtlest argument 
Were baffled by a boy. 

In each averted face 

I marked but scorn and loathing, till mine eyes 
Fell upon one that stirred not in his place, 

Tranced in a dumb surprise. 

Surely within his mind 

Strange thoughts are born, until he doubts the lore 
Of those old men, blind leaders of the blind, 

Whose kingdom is no more. 

Surely he sees afar 

A day of death the stormy future brings; 

The crimson setting of the herald-star 
That led the Eastern kings. 

Thus, as a sunless deep 

Mirrors the shining heights that crown the bay, 

So did my soul create anew in sleep 
The picture seen by day. 

Gazers came and went— 

A restless hum of voices marked the spot— 

In varying shades of critic discontent 
Prating they knew not what. 

"Where is the comely limb, 

The form attuned in every perfect part, 

The beauty that we should desire in him?” 

Ah! Fools and slow of heart! 



874 


VERSE 


Look into those deep eyes, 

Deep as the grave, and strong with love divine; 
Those tender, pure, and fathomless mysteries, 

That seem to pierce through thine. 

Look into those deep eyes, 

Stirred to unrest by breath of coming strife, 

Until a longing in thy soul arise 
That this indeed were life: 

That thou couldst find Him there, 

Bend at His sacred feet thy willing knee, 

And from thy heart pour out the passionate prayer, 
"Lord, let me follow Thee!” 

But see the crowd divide: 

Mother and sire have found their lost one now: 

The gentle voice, that fain would seem to chide, 
Whispers, "Son, why hast thou”— 

In tone of sad amaze— 

“Thus dealt with us, that art our dearest thing? 
Behold, thy sire and I, three weary days, 

Have sought thee sorrowing.” 

And I had stayed to hear 
The loving words, “How is it that ye sought?”— 
But that the sudden lark, with matins clear, 
Severed the links of thought. 

Then over all there fell 
Shadow and silence; and my dream was fled, 

As fade the phantoms of a wizard’s cell 
When the dark charm is said. 

Yet, in the gathering light, 

I lay with half-shut eyes that would not wake, 
Lovingly clinging to the skirts of night 
For that sweet vision’s sake. 

Feb. 16,1861. 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 875 


FACES IN THE FIRE 

The night creeps onward, sad and slow: 

In these red embers’ dying glow 
The forms of Fancy come and go. 

An island-farm—broad seas of corn 
Stirred by the wandering breath of morn— 
The happy spot where I was born. 

The picture fadeth in its place: 

Amid the glow I seem to trace 
The shifting semblance of a face. 

’Tis now a little childish form— 

Red lips for kisses pouted warm—- 
And elf-locks tangled in the storm. 

’Tis now a grave and gentle maid, 

At her own beauty half afraid, 

Shrinking, and willing to be stayed. 

Oh, Time was young, and Life was warm, 
When first I saw that fairy-form, 

Her dark hair tossing in the storm. 

And fast and free these pulses played, 
When last I met that gentle maid— 

When last her hand in mine was laid. 

Those locks of jet are turned to gray, 

And she is strange and far away 

That might have been mine own to-day— 

That might have been mine own, my dear, 
Through many and many a happy year— 
That might have sat beside me here. 



876 


VERSE 


Ay, changeless through the changing scene, 
The ghostly whisper rings between. 

The dark refrain of "might have been”. 

The race is o’er I might have run: 

The deeds are past I might have done; 

And sere the wreath I might have won. 

Sunk is the last faint flickering blaze: 

The vision of departed days 
Is vanished even as I gaze. 

The pictures, with their ruddy light, 

Are changed to dust and ashes white, 

And I am left alone with night. 

Jan. i860. 


A LESSON IN LATIN 

Our Latin books, in motley row, 

Invite us to our task— 

Gay Horace, stately Cicero: 

Yet there’s one verb, when once we know, 
No higher skill we ask: 

This ranks all other lore above— 

We’ve learned “ ‘Amure means ‘to love’l” 

So, hour by hour, from flower to flower, 
We sip the sweets of Life: 

Till, all too soon, the clouds arise, 

And flaming cheeks and flashing eyes 
Proclaim the dawn of strife: 

With half a smile and half a sigh, 

" Amare! Bitter One!” we cry. 



THREE SUNSETS AND OTHER POEMS 877 

Last night we owned, with looks forlorn, 

“Too well the scholar knows 
There is no rose without a thorn”— 

But peace is made! We sing, this morn, 

“No thorn without a rose!” 

Our Latin lesson is complete: 

We’ve learned that Love is Bitter-Sweet! 

May 1888. 


PUCK LOST AND FOUND 

ACROSTIC 

[“Inscribed in two books . . . presented to a little girl and 
boy, as a sort of memento of a visit paid by them to the 
author one day, on which occasion he taught them the 
pastime of folding paper ‘pistols’.”] 

Puck has fled the haunts of men: 

Ridicule has made him wary: 

In the woods, and down the glen. 

No one meets a Fairy! 

“Cream!” the greedy Goblin cries— 

Empties the deserted dairy— 

Steals the spoons, and off he flies. 

Still we seek our Fairy! 

Ah! What form is entering? 

Lovelit eyes and laughter airy! 

Is not this a better thing, 

Child, whose visit thus I sing, 

Even than a Fairy? 

Nov. 22, 1891. 



878 


VERSE 


Puck has ventured back agen: 

Ridicule no more affrights him: 
In the very haunts of men 
Newer sport delights him. 

Capering lightly to and fro, 

Ever frolicking and funning— 
“Crack!” the mimic pistols go! 
Hark! The noise is stunning! 

All too soon will Childhood gay 
Realize Life’s sober sadness. 
Let's be merry while we may, 
Innocent and happy Fay! 

Elves were made for gladness! 

Nov. 25,1891. 



VI 

Stories 






TO MY PUPIL 


Beloved Pupil! Tamed by thee, 
Addish-, Subtrac-, Multiplica-tion, 
Division, Fractions, Rule of Three, 
Attest thy deft manipulation! 

Then onward! Let the voice of Fame 
From Age to Age repeat thy story, 
Till thou hast won thyself a name 
Exceeding even Euclid’s glory. 


881 


2 F 


L.C. 



PREFACE 


This Tale originally appeared as a serial in The Monthly 
Packet beginning in April 1880. The writer’s intention 
was to embody in each Knot (like the medicine so dex¬ 
terously, but ineffectually, concealed in the jam of our 
early childhood) one or more mathematical questions—in 
Arithmetic, Algebra, or Geometry, as the case might be— 
for the amusement, and possible edification, of the fair 
readers of that magazine. 

L. C. 

December 1885. 


882 



A TANGLED TALE 


Knot I 
Excelsior 

Goblin, lead them up and down 

The ruddy glow of sunset was already fading into the 
sombre shadows of night, when two travelers might have 
been observed swiftly—at a pace of six miles in the hour 
—descending the rugged side of a mountain; the younger 
bounding from crag to crag with the agility of a fawn, 
while his companion, whose aged limbs seemed ill at ease 
in the heavy chain armour habitually worn by tourists 
in that district, toiled on painfully at his side. 

As is always the case under such circumstances, the 
younger knight was the first to break the silence. 

“A goodly pace, I trow!’' he exclaimed. “We sped not 
thus in the ascent!” 

“Goodly, indeed!” the other echoed with a groan. “We 
clomb it but at three miles in the hour.” 

“And on the dead level our pace is-?” the younger 

suggested; for he was weak in statistics, and left all such 
details to his aged companion. 

“Four miles in the hour,” the other wearily replied. 
“Not an ounce more,” he added, with that love of meta¬ 
phor so common in old age, “and not a farthing less!” 

“ ’Twas three hours past high noon when we left our 
hostelry,” the young man said, musingly. “We shall 
scarce be back by supper-time. Perchance mine host will 
roundly deny us all food!” 

“He will chide our tardy return,” was the grave reply, 
"and such a rebuke will be meet.” 

"A brave conceit!” cried the other, with a merry laugh. 
“And should we bid him bring us yet another course, I 
trow his answer will be tart!” 

883 



STORIES 


884 

“We shall but get our deserts,” sighed the eider knight, 
who had never seen a joke in his life, and was somewhat 
displeased at his companion’s untimely levity. “ ’Twill be 
nine of the clock”, he added in an undertone, “by the 
time we regain our hostelry. Full many a mile shall we 
have plodded this day!” 

“How many? How many?” cried the eager youth, ever 
athirst for knowledge. 

The old man was silent. 

“Tell me”, he answered, after a moment’s thought, 
“what time it was when we stood together on yonder 
peak. Not exact to the minute!” he added hastily, reading 
a protest in the young man’s face. “An thy guess be with¬ 
in one poor half-hour of the mark, ’tis all I ask of thy 
mother’s son! Then will I tell thee, true to the last inch, 
how far we shall have trudged betwixt three and nine of 
the clock.” 

A groan was the young man’s only reply; while his 
convulsed features and the deep wrinkles that chased 
each other across his manly brow, revealed the abyss of 
arithmetical agony into which one chance question had 
plunged him. 


Knot II 

Eligible Apartments 

Straight down the crooked lane, 

And all round the square. 

“Let’s ask Balbus about it,” said Hugh. 

“All right,” said Lambert. 

“He can guess it,” said Hugh. 

“Rather,” said Lambert. 

No more words were needed: the two brothers under¬ 
stood each other perfectly. 

Balbus was waiting for them at the hotel: the journey 



A TANGLED TALE 885 

down had tired him, he said: so his two pupils had been 
the round of the place, in search of lodgings, without the 
old tutor who had been their inseparable companion from 
their childhood. They had named him after the hero of 
their Latin exercise-book, which overflowed with anec¬ 
dotes of that versatile genius—anecdotes whose vagueness 
in detail was more than compensated by their sensational 
brilliance. “Balbus has overcome all his enemies" had 
been marked by their tutor, in the margin of the book, 
“Successful Bravery." In this way he had tried to extract 
a moral from every anecdote about Balbus—sometimes 
one of warning, as in, "Balbus had borrowed a healthy 
dragon,” against which he had written, “Rashness in 
Speculation”—sometimes of encouragement, as in the 
words, “Influence of Sympathy in United Action," which 
stood opposite to the anecdote, “Balbus was assisting his 
mother-in-law to convince the dragon”—and sometimes 
it dwindled down to a single word, such as “Prudence", 
which was all he could extract from the touching record 
that “Balbus, having scorched the tail of the dragon, went 
away". His pupils liked the short morals best, as it left 
them more room for marginal illustrations, and in this 
instance they required all the space they could get to 
exhibit the rapidity of the hero’s departure. 

Their report of the state of things was discouraging. 
That most fashionable of watering-places, Little Mendip, 
was “chock-full” (as the boys expressed it) from end to 
end. But in one Square they had seen no less than four 
cards, in different houses, all announcing in flaming capi¬ 
tals, “eligible apartments.” “So there's plenty of 
choice, after all, you see,” said spokesman Hugh in con¬ 
clusion. 

“That doesn’t follow from the data,” said Balbus, as 
he rose from the easy-chair, where he had been dozing 
over The Little Mendip Gazette. “They may be all single 
rooms. However, we may as well see them. I shall be glad 
to stretch my legs a bit.” 

An unprejudiced bystander might have objected that 



886 


STORIES 


the operation was needless, and that this long lank crea¬ 
ture would have been all the better with even shorter 
legs: but no such thought occurred to his loving pupils. 
One on each side, they did their best to keep up with his 
gigantic strides, while Hugh repeated the sentence in 
their father’s letter, just received from abroad, over which 
he and Lambert had been puzzling. “He says a friend of 
his, the Governor of —what was that name again, Lam¬ 
bert?” (“Kgovjni,” said Lambert.) “Well, yes. The 
Governor of—what-you-may-call-it—wants to give a very 
small dinner-party, and he means to ask his father’s 
brother-in-law, his brother’s father-in-law, his father-in- 
law’s brother, and his brother-in-law’s father: and we’re 
to guess how many guests there will be.” 

There was an anxious pause. “How large did he say 
the pudding was to be?” Balbus said at last. "Take its 
cubical contents, divide by the cubical contents of what 
each man can eat, and the quotient-” 

“He didn’t say anything about pudding,” said Hugh, 
“—and here's the Square,” as they turned a corner and 
came into sight of the “eligible apartments”. 

"It is a Square!” was Balbus's first cry of delight, as 
he gazed around him. “Beautiful! Beau-ti-ful! Equi¬ 
lateral! And rectangular!” 

The boys looked round with less enthusiasm. “Number 
Nine is the first with a card,” said prosaic Lambert; but 
Balbus would not so soon awake from his dream of beauty. 

“See, boys!” he cried. “Twenty doors on a side! What 
symmetry! Each side divided into twenty-one equal parts! 
It’s delicious!” 

“Shall I knock, or ring?” said Hugh, looking in some 
perplexity at a square brass plate which bore the simple 
inscription, “ring also.” 

“Both,” said Balbus. “That’s an Ellipsis, my boy. Did 
you never see an Ellipsis before? ” 

“I couldn’t hardly read it,” said Hugh evasively. “It’s 
no good having an Ellipsis, if they don’t keep it clean.” 

“Which there is one room, gentlemen,” said the smiling 



A TANGLED TALE 887 

landlady. “And a sweet room too! As snug a little back¬ 
room-” 

“We will see it,” said Balbus gloomily, as they fol¬ 
lowed her in. "I knew how it would be! One room in 
each house! No view, I suppose?” 

“Which indeed there is, gentlemen!” the landlady in¬ 
dignantly protested, as she drew up the blind, and 
indicated the back-garden. 

“Cabbages, I perceive,” said Balbus. “Well, they’re 
green, at any rate.” 

“Which the greens at the shops”, their hostess ex¬ 
plained, “are by no means dependable upon. Here you 
has them on the premises, and of the best.” 

“Does the window open?” was always Balbus’s first 
question in testing a lodging: and, “Does the chimney 
smoke?” his second. Satisfied on all points, he secured 
the refusal of the room, and they moved on to Number 
Twenty-five. 

This landlady was grave and stern. “I’ve nobbut one 
room left,” she told them: "and it gives on the back- 
gyardin.” 

“But there are cabbages?” Balbus suggested. 

The landlady visibly relented. “There is, sir,” she said: 
“and good ones, though I say it as shouldn’t. We ca’n’t 
rely on the shops for greens. So we grows them ourselves.” 

"A singular advantage,” said Balbus; and, after the 
usual questions, they went on to Fifty-two. 

“And I’d gladly accommodate you all, if I could,” was 
the greeting that met them. “We are but mortal” (“Irre¬ 
levant!” muttered Balbus), “and I’ve let all my rooms 
but one.” 

“Which one is a back-room, I perceive,” said Balbus: 
“and looking out on—on cabbages, I presume?” 

"Yes, indeed, sir!” said their hostess. “Whatever other 
folks may do, we grows our own. For the shops-” 

“An excellent arrangement!” Balbus interrupted. 
“Then one can really depend on their being good. Does 
the window open ? ’ ’ 



888 


STORIES 


The usual questions were answered satisfactorily: but 
this time Hugh added one of his own invention—“Does 
the cat scratch?” 

The landlady looked round suspiciously, as if to make 
sure the cat was not listening. “I will not deceive you, 
gentlemen,” she said. "It do scratch, but not without you 
pulls its whiskers! It'll never do it”, she repeated slowly, 
with a visible effort to recall the exact words of some 
written agreement between herself and the cat,, "without 
you pulls its whiskers!” 

"Much may be excused in a cat so treated,” said Balbus, 
as they left the house and crossed to Number Seventy- 
three, leaving the landlady curtseying on the doorstep, 
and still murmuring to herself her parting words, as if 
they were a form of blessing, "—not without you pulls 
its whiskers!” 

At Number Seventy-three they found only a small shy 
girl to show the house, who said "yes’m” in answer to all 
questions. 

"The usual room,” said Balbus, as they marched in 
"the usual back-garden, the usual cabbages. I suppose 
you can’t get them good at the shops?” 

"Yes’m,” said the girl. 

"Well, you may tell your mistress we will take the 
room, and that her plan of growing her own cabbages is 
simply admitablel” 

"Yes’m,” said the girl, as she showed them out. 

"One day-room and three bedrooms,” said Balbus, as 
they returned to the hotel. “We will take as our day-room 
the one that gives us the least walking to do to get to it.” 

“Must we walk from door to door, and count the 
steps?” said Lambert. 

"No, no! Figure it out, my boys, figure it out!” Balbus 
gayly exclaimed, as he put pens, ink, and paper before 
his hapless pupils, and left the room. 

"I say! It’ll be a job!” said Hugh. 

"Rather!” said Lambert. 



A TANGLED TALE 


889 


Knot III 
Mad Mathesis 
I waited for the train 

“Well, they call me so because I am a little mad, I 
suppose/’ she said, good-humouredly, in answer to Clara’s 
cautiously worded question as to how she came by so 
strange a nickname. “You see, I never do what sane 
people are expected to do nowadays. I never wear long 
trains (talking of trains, that’s the Charing Cross Metro¬ 
politan Station—I’ve something to tell you about that), 
and I never play lawn-tennis. I ca’n’t cook an omelette. I 
ca’n’t even set a broken limb! There’s an ignoramus for 
you!’’ 

Clara was her niece, and full twenty years her junior; 
in fact, she was still attending a High School—an institu¬ 
tion of which Mad Mathesis spoke with undisguised aver¬ 
sion. “Let a woman be meek and lowly!” she would say. 
“None of your High Schools for me!” But it was vacation¬ 
time just now, and Clara was her guest, and Mad Mathesis 
was showing her the sights of that Eighth Wonder of the 
world—London. 

“The Charing Cross Metropolitan Station!” she re¬ 
sumed, waving her hand towards the entrance as if she 
were introducing her niece to a friend. “The Bayswater 
and Birmingham Extension is just completed, and the 
trains now run round and round continuously—skirting 
the border of Wales, just touching at York, and so round 
by the east coast back to London. The way the trains run 
is most peculiar. The v/esterly ones go round in two 
hours; the easterly ones take three; but they always 
manage to start two trains from here, opposite ways, 
punctually every quarter of an hour.” 

“They part to meet again,” said Clara, her eyes filling 
with tears at the romantic thought. 



STORIES 


89O 

“No need to cry about it!" her aunt grimly remarked. 
“They don't meet on the same line of rails, you know. 
Talking of meeting, an idea strikes me!” she added, 
changing the subject with her usual abruptness. “Let’s 
go opposite ways round, and see which can meet most 
trains. No need for a chaperon—ladies’ saloon, you know. 
You shall go whichever way you like, and we’ll have a bet 
about it!” 

“I never make bets,” Clara said very gravely. “Our 
excellent preceptress has often warned us-” 

“You’d be none the worst if you did!” Mad Mathesis 
interrupted. “In fact, you’d be the better, I’m certain!” 

“Neither does our excellent preceptress approve of 
puns,” said Clara. “But we’ll have a match, if you like. 
Let me choose my train,” she added after a brief mental 
calculation, "and I’ll engage to meet exactly half as many 
again as you do.” 

“Not if you count fair,” Mad Mathesis bluntly inter¬ 
rupted. “Remember, we only count the trains we meet 
on the way. You mustn’t count the one that starts as you 
start, nor the one that arrives as you arrive.” 

"That will only make the difference of one train,” said 
Clara, as they turned and entered the station. “But I 
never travelled alone before. There’ll be no one to help 
me to alight. However, I don’t mind. Let’s have a match.” 

A ragged little boy overheard her remark, and came 
running after her. “Buy a box of cigar-lights, Miss!” he 
pleaded, pulling her shawl to attract her attention. Clara 
stopped to explain. 

“I never smoke cigars,” she said in a meekly apologetic 

tone. “Our excellent preceptress-” But Mad Mathesis 

impatiently hurried her on, and the little boy was left 
gazing after her with round eyes of amazement. 

The two ladies bought their tickets and moved slowly 
down the central platform. Mad Mathesis prattling on as 
usual—Clara silent, anxiously reconsidering the calcula¬ 
tion on which she rested her hopes of winning the match. 

“Mind where you go, dear!” cried her aunt, checking 



A TANGLED TALE 89I 

her just in time. “One step more, and you’d have been in 
that pail of cold water!” 

“I know, I know,” Clara said dreamily. “The pale, the 
cold, and the moony-” 

“Take your places on the spring-boards!” shouted a 
porter. 

“What are they for!” Clara asked in a terrified whisper. 

“Merely to help us into the trains.” The elder lady 
spoke with the nonchalance of one quite used to the 
process. “Very few people can get into a carriage without 
help in less than three seconds, and the trains only stop 
for one second.” At this moment the whistle was heard, 
and two trains rushed into the station. A moment’s pause, 
and they were gone again; but in that brief interval 
several hundred passengers had been shot into them, each 
flying straight to his place with the accuracy of a Minie 
bullet—while an equal number were showered out upon 
the side-platforms. 

Three hours had passed away, and the two friends met 
again on the Charing Cross platform, and eagerly com¬ 
pared notes. Then Clara turned away with a sigh. To 
young impulsive hearts, like hers, disappointment is al¬ 
ways a bitter pill. Mad Mathesis followed her, full of 
kindly sympathy. 

“Try again, my love!” she said cheerily. “Let us vary 
the experiment. We will start as we did before, but not 
begin counting till our trains meet. When we see each 
other, we will say ‘One!’ and so count on till we come 
here again.” 

Clara brightened up. “I shall win that”, she exclaimed 
eagerly, “if I may choose my train!” 

Another shriek of engine whistles, another upheaving 
of spring-boards, another living avalanche plunging into 
two trains as they flashed by and the travelers were off 
again. 

Each gazed eagerly from her carriage window, holding 
up her handkerchief as a signal to her friend. A rush and 
a roar. Two trains shot past each other in a tunnel, and 



STORIES 


892 

two travelers leaned back in their corners with a sigh— 
or rather with two sighs—of relief "One!” Clara mur¬ 
mured to herself. "Won! It's a word of good omen. This 
time, at any rate, the victory will be mine!” 

But was it? 


Knot IV 

The Dead Reckoning 

I did dream of money-hags to-night 

Noonday on the open sea within a few degrees of the 
Equator is apt to be oppressively warm; and our two 
travelers were now airily clad in suits of dazzling white 
linen, having laid aside the chain-armour which they had 
found not only endurable in the cold mountain air they 
had lately been breathing, but a necessary precaution 
against the daggers of the banditti who infested the 
heights. Their holiday-trip was over, and they were now 
on their way home, in the monthly packet which plied 
between the two great ports of the island they had been 
exploring. 

Along with their armour, the tourists had laid aside 
the antiquated speech it had pleased them to affect while 
in knightly disguise, and had returned to the ordinary 
style of two country gentlemen of the twentieth century. 

Stretched on a pile of cushions, under the shade of a 
huge umbrella, they were lazily watching some native 
fishermen, who had come on board at the last landing- 
place, each carrying over his shoulder a small but heavy 
sack. A large weighing-machine, that had been used for 
cargo at the last port, stood on the deck; and round this 
the fishermen had gathered, and, with much unintelligible 
jabber, seemed to be weighing their sacks. 

"More like sparrows in* a tree than human talk, isn’t 
it?” the elder tourist remarked to his son, who smiled 



A TANGLED TALE 893 

feebly, but would not exert himself so far as to speak. The 
old man tried another listener. 

“What have they got in those sacks, Captain?” he 
enquired, as that great being passed them in his never- 
ending parade to and fro on the deck. 

The Captain paused in his march, and towered over the 
travelers—tall, grave, and serenely self-satisfied. 

“Fishermen”, he explained, “are often passengers in 
My ship. These five are from Mhruxi—the place we last 
touched at—and that’s the way they carry their money. 
The money of this island is heavy, gentlemen, but it costs 
little, as you may guess. We buy it from them by weight— 
about five shillings a pound. I fancy a ten-pound note 
would buy all those sacks.” 

By this time the old man had closed his eyes—in order, 
no doubt, to concentrate his thoughts on these interesting 
facts; but the Captain failed to realize his motive, and 
with a grunt resumed his monotonous march. 

Meanwhile the fishermen were getting so noisy over the 
weighing-machine that one of the sailors took the pre¬ 
caution of carrying off all the weights, leaving them to 
amuse themselves with such substitutes in the form of 
winch-handles, belaying-pins, etc., as they could find. 
This brought their excitement to a speedy end: they 
carefully hid their sacks in the folds of the jib that lay on 
the deck near the tourists, and strolled away. 

When next the Captain’s heavy footfall passed, the 
younger man roused himself to speak. 

“What did you call the place those fellows came from, 
Captain?” he asked. 

“Mhruxi, sir.” 

“And the one we are bound for?” 

The Captain took a long breath, plunged into the word, 
and came out of it nobly. “They call it Kgovjni, sir.” 

“K—I give it up!” the young man faintly said. 

He stretched out his hand for a glass of iced water 
which the compassionate steward had brought him a 
minute ago, and had set down, unluckily, just outside the 



STORIES 


894 

shadow of the umbrella. It was scalding hot, and he de¬ 
cided not to drink it. The effort of making this resolu¬ 
tion, coming close on the fatiguing conversation he had 
just gone through, was too much for him; he sank back 
among the cushions in silence. 

His father courteously tried to make amends for his 
nonchalance. 

“Whereabout are we now, Captain?’’ said he. “Have 
you any idea?” 

The Captain cast a pitying look on the ignorant lands¬ 
man. “I could tell you that, sir,” he said, in a tone of lofty 
condescension, “to an inch!” 

“You don’t say so!” the old man remarked, in a tone of 
languid surprise. 

“And mean to,” persisted the Captain. “Why, what do 
you suppose would become of My ship, if I were to lose 
My longitude and My latitude? Could you make any¬ 
thing of My Dead Reckoning?” 

“Nobody could, I’m sure!” the other heartily rejoined. 

But he had overdone it. 

“It’s perfectly intelligible”, the Captain said, in an 
offended tone, “to anyone that understands such things.” 
With these words he moved away, and began giving 
orders to the men, who were preparing to hoist the jib. 

Our tourists watched the operation with such interest 
that neither of them remembered the five money-bags, 
which in another moment, as the wind filled out the jib, 
were whirled overboard and fell heavily into the sea. 

But the poor fishermen had not so easily forgotten their 
property. In a moment they had rushed to the spot, and 
stood uttering cries of fury, and pointing, now to the sea, 
and now to the sailors who had caused the disaster. 

The old man explained it to the Captain. 

“Let us make it up among us,” he added in conclusion. 
“Ten pounds will do it, I think you said?” 

But the Captain put aside the suggestion with a wave 
of the hand. 

“No, sir!” he said, in his grandest manner. “You will 



A TANGLED TALE 


895 

excuse Me, I am sure; but these are My passengers. The 
accident has happened on board My ship, and under My 
orders. It is for Me to make compensation.” He turned 
to the angry fishermen. “Come here, my men!” he said, 
in the Mhruxian dialect. ‘‘Tell me the weight of each sack. 
I saw you weighing them just now.” 

Then ensued a perfect Babel of noise, as the five natives 
explained, all screaming together, how the sailors had 
carried off the weights, and they had done what they 
could with whatever came handy. 

Two iron belaying-pins, three blocks, six holy stones, 
four winch-handles, and a large hammer, were now care¬ 
fully weighed, the Captain superintending and noting the 
results. But the matter did not seem to be settled, even 
then: an angry discussion followed, in which the sailors 
and the five natives all joined: and at last the Captain 
approached our tourists with a disconcerted look, which 
he tried to conceal under a laugh. 

‘‘It’s an absurd difficulty,” he said. ‘‘Perhaps one of you 
gentlemen can suggest something. It seems they weighed 
the sacks two at a time!” 

“If they didn’t have five separate weighings, of course 
you ca’n’t value them separately,” the youth hastily de¬ 
cided. 

“Let’s hear all about it,” was the old man’s more 
cautious remark. 

“They did have five separate weighings,” the Captain 
said, “but—well, it beats me entirely!” he added, in a 
sudden burst of candour. “Here’s the result: First and 
second sacks weighed twelve pounds; second and third, 
thirteen and a half; third and fourth, eleven and a half; 
fourth and fifth, eight; and then they say they had only 
the large hammer left, and it took three sacks to weigh 
it down—that’s the first, third, and fifth—and they 
weighed sixteen pounds. There, gentlemen! Did you ever 
hear anything like that?” 

The old man muttered under his breath, “If only my 
sister were here!” and looked helplessly at Ids son. His 



896 STORIES 

son looked at the five natives. The five natives looked at 
the Captain. The Captain looked at nobody: his eyes were 
cast down, and he seemed to be saying softly to himself, 
"Contemplate one another, gentlemen, if such be your 
good pleasure. I contemplate Myself !” 


Knot V 

Oughts and Crosses 

Look here, upon this picture, and on this 

"And what made you choose the first train, Goosey?” 
said Mad Mathesis, as they got into the cab. "Couldn’t 
you count better than that ?” 

"I took an extreme case,” was the tearful reply. "Our 
excellent preceptress always says, ‘When in doubt, my 
dears, take an extreme case.’ And I was in doubt.” 

"Does it always succeed?” her aunt inquired. 

Clara sighed. "Not always,” she reluctantly admitted. 
“And I ca’n’t make out why. One day she was telling the 
little girls—they make such a noise at tea, you know— 
‘The more noise you make, the less jam you will have, 
and vice versa.’ And I thought they wouldn’t know what 
‘vice versa’ meant: so I explained it to them. I said, ‘If 
you make an infinite noise, you’ll get no jam: and if you 
make no noise, you’ll get an infinite lot of jam.’ But our 
excellent preceptress said that wasn’t a good instance. 
Why wasn’t it?” she added plaintively. 

Her aunt evaded the question. "One sees certain objec¬ 
tions to it,” she said. "But how did you work it with the 
Metropolitan trains? None of them go infinitely fast, I 
believe.” 

"I called them hares and tortoises,” Clara said—a little 
timidly, for she dreaded being laughed at. "And I thought 
there couldn’t be so many hares as tortoises on the Line: 



A TANGLED TALE 897 

so I took an extreme case—one hare and an infinite 
number of tortoises.” 

“An extreme case, indeed,” her aunt remarked with 
admirable gravity: “and a most dangerous state of 
things!” 

“And I thought, if I went with a tortoise, there would 
be only one hare to meet: but if I went with the hare—- 
you know there were crowds of tortoises!” 

“It wasn’t a bad idea,” said the elder lady, as they left 
the cab, at the entrance of Burlington House. “You shall 
have another chance to-day. We’ll have a match in mark¬ 
ing pictures.” 

Clara brightened up. “I should like to try again, very 
much,” she said. “I’ll take more care this time. How are 
we to play?” 

To this question Mad Mathesis made no reply: she was 
busy drawing lines down the margins of the catalogue. 
“See,” she said after a minute, “I’ve drawn three columns 
against the names of the pictures in the long room, and 
I want you to fill them with oughts and crosses—crosses 
for good marks and oughts for bad. The first column is 
for choice of subject, the second for arrangement, the 
third for colouring. And these are the conditions of the 
match: You must give three crosses to two or three 
pictures. You must give two crosses to four or five-” 

“Do you mean only two crosses?” said Clara. “Or may 
I count the three-cross pictures among the two-cross 
pictures?” 

“Of course you may,” said her aunt. “Anyone that has 
three eyes, may be said to have two eyes, I suppose? ” 

Clara followed her aunt’s dreamy gaze across the 
crowded gallery, half-dreading to find that there was a 
three-eyed person in sight. 

“And you must give one cross to nine or ten.” 

“And which wins the match?” Clara asked, as she 
carefully entered these conditions on a blank leaf in her 
catalogue. 

“Whichever marks fewest pictures.” 



STORIES 


898 

“But suppose we marked the same number? ” 

“Then whichever uses most marks.” 

Clara considered. “I don’t think it’s much of a match,” 
she said. “I shall mark nine pictures, and give three 
crosses to three of them, two crosses to two more, and one 
cross each to all the rest.” 

“Will you, indeed?” said her aunt. “Wait till you've 
heard all the conditions, my impetuous child. You must 
give three oughts to one or two pictures, two oughts to 
three or four, and one ought to eight or nine. I don’t want 
you to be too hard on the R.A.’s.” 

Clara quite gasped as she wrote down all these fresh 
conditions. “It’s a great deal worse than Circulating 
Decimals!” she said. “But I’m determined to win, all the 
same!” 

Her aunt smiled grimly. “We can begin here,” she said, 
as they paused before a gigantic picture, which the 
catalogue informed them was the “Portrait of Lieutenant 
Brown, mounted on his favourite elephant”. 

“He looks awfully conceited!” said Clara. “I don't think 
he was the elephant’s favourite Lieutenant. What a hide¬ 
ous picture it is! And it takes up room enough for twenty!” 

“Mind what you say, my dear!” her aunt interposed. 
“It’sby an R.A.!” 

But Clara was quite reckless. “I don’t care who it’s by!” 
she cried. “And I shall give it three bad marks!” 

Aunt and niece soon drifted away from each other in 
the crowd, and for the next half-hour Clara was hard at 
work, putting in marks and rubbing them out again, and 
hunting up and down for a suitable picture. This she 
found the hardest part of all. “I can’t find the one I 
want!” she exclaimed at last, almost crying with vexation. 

“What is it you want to find, my dear?” The voice was 
strange to Clara, but so sweet and gentle that she felt at¬ 
tracted to the owner of it, even before she had seen her; 
and when she turned, and met the smiling looks of two 
little old ladies, whose round dimpled faces, exactly alike, 
seemed never to have known a care, it was as much as she 



A TANGLED TALE 899 

could do—as she confessed to Aunt Mattie afterwards— 
to keep herself from hugging them both. “I was looking 
for a picture”, she said, “that has a good subject—and 
that’s well arranged—but badly coloured.” 

The little old ladies glanced at each other in some alarm. 
“Calm yourself, my dear,” said the one who had spoken 
first, ‘‘and try to remember which it was. What was the 
subject?” 

‘‘Was it an elephant, for instance?” the other sister 
suggested. They were still in sight of Lieutenant Brown. 

‘‘I don’t know, indeed!” Clara impetuously replied. 
‘‘You know it doesn’t matter a bit what the subject is, so 
long as it ’ s a good one! ” 

Once more the sisters exchanged looks of alarm, and 
one of them whispered something to the other, of which 
Clara caught only the one word ‘‘mad”. 

‘‘They mean Aunt Mattie, of course,” she said to her¬ 
self—fancying, in her innocence, that London was like 
her native town, where everybody knew everybody else. 
‘‘If you mean my aunt,” she added aloud, ‘‘she’s there — 
just three pictures beyond Lieutenant Brown.” 

‘‘Ah, well! Then you’d better go to her, my dear!” her 
new friend said soothingly. “She’.ll find you the picture 
you want. Good-bye, dear!” 

‘‘Good-bye, dear!” echoed the other sister. ‘‘Mind you 
don’t lose sight of your aunt!” And the pair trotted off 
into another room, leaving Clara rather perplexed at their 
manner. 

‘‘They’re real darlings!” she soliloquized. ‘‘I wonder 
why they pity me so!” And she wandered on, murmuring 
to herself, ‘‘It must have two good marks, and-” 



goo 


STORIES 


Knot VI 
Her Radiancy 

One piecee thing that my have got, 

Maskee 1 that thing my no can do. 

You talkee you no sabey what? 

Bamboo. 

They landed, and were at once conducted to the Palace. 
About half-way they were met by the Governor, who 
welcomed them in English—a great relief to our travelers, 
whose guide could speak nothing but Kgovjnian. 

“I don’t half like the way they grin at us as we go by!” 
the old man whispered to his son. “And why do they say 
‘Bamboo’ so often?” 

“It alludes to a local custom,” replied the Governor, 
who had overheard the question. “Such persons as hap¬ 
pen in any way to displease Her Radiancy are usually 
beaten with rods.” 

The old man shuddered. “A most objectionable local 
custom!” he remarked with strong emphasis. “I wish we 
had never landed! Did you notice that black fellow, Nor¬ 
man, opening his great mouth at us? I verily believe he 
would like to eat us!” 

Norman appealed to the Governor, who was walking 
at his other side. “Do they often eat distinguished 
strangers here?” he said, in as indifferent a tone as he 
could assume. 

“Not often—not ever!” was the welcome reply. “They 
are not good for it. Pigs we eat, for they are fat. This old 
man is thin.” 

“And thankful to be so!” muttered the elder traveler. 
“Beaten we shall be without a doubt. It’s a comfort to 
know it won’t be Beaten without the B! My dear boy, 
just look at the peacocks!” 

1 "Maskee”, in Pigeon-Englisli, means "Without”. 



A TANGLED TALE 


901 

They were now walking between two unbroken lines of 
those gorgeous birds, each held in check, by means of a 
golden collar and chain, by a black slave, who stood well 
behind, so as not to interrupt the view of the glittering 
tail, with its network of rustling feathers and its hundred 
eyes. 

The Governor smiled proudly. "In your honour,” he 
said, "Her Radiancy has ordered up ten thousand addi¬ 
tional peacocks. She will, no doubt, decorate you, before 
you go, with the usual Star and Feathers.” 

"It'll be Star without the S! ” faltered one of his hearers. 

"Come, come! Don’t lose heart!” said the other. "All 
this is full of charm for me.” 

"You are young, Norman,” sighed his father; "young 
and light-hearted. For me, it is Charm without the C.” 

“The old one is sad,” the Governor remarked with 
some anxiety. "He has, without doubt, effected some 
fearful crime?” 

"But I haven’t!” the poor old gentleman hastily ex¬ 
claimed. "Tell him I haven’t, Norman!” 

"He has not, as yet,” Norman gently explained. And 
the Governor repeated, in a satisfied tone, "Not as 
yet.” 

“Yours is a wondrous country!” the Governor resumed, 
after a pause. "Now here is a letter from a friend of mine, 
a merchant, in London. He and his brother went there 
a year ago, with a thousand pounds apiece; and on New 
Year’s Day they had sixty thousand pounds between 
them!” 

"How did they do it?” Norman eagerly exclaimed. 
Even the elder traveler looked excited. 

The Governor handed him the open letter. "Anybody 
can do it, when once they know how,” so ran this oracular 
document. “We borrowed nought: we stole nought. We 
began the year with only a thousand pounds apiece: and 
last New Year’s Day we had sixty thousand pounds 
between us—sixty thousand golden sovereigns!” 

Norman looked grave and thoughtful as he handed 



STORIES 


902 

back the letter. His father hazarded one guess. "Was it by 
gambling?" 

"A Kgovjnian never gambles," said the Governor 
gravely, as he ushered them through the palace gates. 
They followed him in silence down a long passage, and 
soon found themselves in a lofty hall, lined entirely with 
peacocks’ feathers. In the centre was a pile of crimson 
cushions, which almost concealed the figure of Her 
Radiancy—a plump little damsel, in a robe of green satin 
dotted with silver stars, whose pale round face lit up for a 
moment with a half-smile as the travelers bowed before 
her, and then relapsed into the exact expression of a wax 
doll, while she languidly murmured a word or two in the 
Kgovjnian dialect. 

The Governor interpreted: "Her Radiancy welcomes 
you. She notes the Impenetrable Placidity of the old one, 
and the Imperceptible Acuteness of the youth." 

Here the little potentate clapped her hands, and a troop 
of slaves instantly appeared, carrying trays of coffee and 
sweetmeats, which they offered to the guests, who had, at 
a signal from the Governor, seated themselves on the 
carpet. 

"Sugar-plums!” muttered the old man. "One might as 
well be at a confectioner’s! Ask for a penny bun, Nor- 

I ’ ’ 

man! 

"Not so loud!" his son whispered. "Say something 
complimentary!” For the Governor was evidently expect¬ 
ing a speech. 

“We thank Her Exalted Potency," the old man timidly 
began. "We bask in the light of her smile, which-” 

"The words of old men are weak!" the Governor inter¬ 
rupted angrily. "Let the youth speak!" 

"Tell her," cried Norman, in a wild burst of eloquence, 
"that, like two grasshoppers in a volcano, we are shri¬ 
velled up in the presence of Her Spangled Vehemence!” 

"It is well,” said the Governor, and translated this into 
Kgovjnian. "I am now to tell you”, he proceeded, "what 
Her Radiancy requires of you before you go. The yearly 



A TANGLED TALE 


903 

competition for the post of Imperial Scarf-maker is just 
ended; you are the judges. You will take account of the 
rate of work, the lightness of the scarves, and their 
warmth. Usually the competitors differ in one point only. 
Thus, last year, Fifi and Gogo made the same number of 
scarves in the trial-week, and they were equally light; but 
Fifi’s were twice as warm as Gogo’s and she was pro¬ 
nounced twice as good. But this year, woe is me, who can 
judge it? Three competitors are here, and they differ in 
all points! While you settle their claims, you shall be 
lodged, Her Radiancy bids me say, free of expense—in 
the best dungeon, and abundantly fed on the best bread 
and water.” 

The old man groaned. "All is lost!” he wildly ex¬ 
claimed. But Norman heeded him not: he had taken out 
his notebook, and was calmly jotting down the particulars. 

"Three they be,” the Governor proceeded. "Lolo, Mimi, 
and Zuzu. Lolo makes 5 scarves while Mimi makes 2; but 
Zuzu makes 4 while Lolo makes 3! Again, so fairy-like is 
Zuzu’s handiwork, 5 of her scarves weigh no more than 
one of Lolo’s; yet Mimi’s is lighter still—5 of hers will but 
balance 3 of Zuzu’s! And for warmth one of Mimi’s is 
equal to 4 of Zuzu’s; yet one of Lolo’s is as warm as 3 of 
Mimi’s!” 

Here the little lady once more clapped her hands. 

"It is our signal of dismissal!” the Governor hastily 
said. "Pay Her Radiancy your farewell compliments— 
and walk out backwards.” 

The walking part was all the elder tourist could manage. 
Norman simply said, "Tell Her Radiancy we are trans¬ 
fixed by the spectacle of Her Serene Brilliance, and bid 
an agonized farewell to her Condensed Milkiness!” 

"Her Radiancy is pleased,” the Governor reported, 
after duly translating this. “She casts on you a glance 
from Her Imperial Eyes, and is confident that you will 
catch it!” 

"That I warrant we shall!” the elder traveler moaned 
to himself distractedly. 



STORIES 


904 

Once more they bowed low, and then followed the 
Governor down a winding staircase to the Imperial 
Dungeon, which they found to be lined with coloured 
marble, lighted from the roof, and splendidly though not 
luxuriously furnished with a bench of polished malachite. 
“I trust you will not delay the calculation,” the Governor 
said, ushering them in with much ceremony. "I have 
known great inconvenience—great and serious incon¬ 
venience—result to those unhappy ones who have delayed 
to execute the commands of Her Radiancy! And on this 
occasion she is resolute: she says the thing must and shall 
be done: and she has ordered up ten thousand additional 
bamboos!” With these words he left them, and they heard 
him lock and bar the door on the outside. 

“I told you how it would end!” moaned the elder 
traveler, wringing his hands, and quite forgetting in his 
anguish that he had himself proposed the expedition, and 
had never predicted anything of the sort. “Oh, that we 
were well out of this miserable business!” 

“Courage!” cried the younger cheerily. “Hcec olim 
meminisse juvabit ! The end of all this will be glory!” 

“Glory without the L!” was all the poor old man could 
say, as he rocked himself to and fro on the malachite 
bench. "Glory without the L!” 


Knot VII 
Petty Cash 

Base is the slave that pays 

“Aunt Mattie!” 

“My child?” 

“Would you mind writing it down at once? I shall be 
quite certain to forget it if you don’t!” 

"My dear, we really must wait till the cab stops. How 



A TANGLED TALE 905 

can I possibly write anything in the midst of all this 
jolting?” 

“But really I shall be forgetting it!” 

Clara's voice took the plaintive tone that her aunt 
never knew how to resist, and with a sigh the old lady 
drew forth her ivory tablets and prepared to record the 
amount that Clara had just spent at the confectioner’s 
shop. Her expenditure was always made out of her aunt’s 
purse, but the poor girl knew, by bitter experience, that 
sooner or later “Mad Mathesis” would expect an exact 
account of every penny that had gone, and she waited, 
with ill-concealed impatience, while the old lady turned 
the tablets over and over, till she had found the one 
headed “petty cash”. 

“Here’s the place,” she said at last, “and here we have 
yesterday’s luncheon duly entered. One glass lemonade 
(Why ca’n't you drink water, like me?), three sandwiches 
(They never put in half mustard enough. I told the young 
woman so, to her face; and she tossed her head—like 
her impudence!), and seven biscuits. Total one-and-two- 
pence. Well, now for to-day’s?” 

“One glass of lemonade-” Clara was beginning to 

say, when suddenly the cab drew up, and a courteous 
railway-porter was handing out the bewildered girl before 
she had had time to finish her sentence. 

Her aunt pocketed the tablets instantly. “Business 
first,” she said: “petty cash—which is a form of pleasure, 
whatever you may think—afterwards.” And she pro¬ 
ceeded to pay the driver, and to give voluminous orders 
about the luggage, quite deaf to the entreaties of her 
unhappy niece that she would enter the rest of the 
luncheon account. “My dear, you really must cultivate 
a more capacious mind!” was all the consolation she 
vouchsafed to the poor girl. “Are not the tablets of your 
memory wide enough to contain the record of one single 
luncheon?” 

“Not wide enough! Not half wide enough!” was the 
passionate reply. 



STORIES 


906 

The words came in aptly enough, but the voice was 
not that of Clara, and both ladies turned in some surprise 
to see who it'was that had so suddenly struck into their 
conversation. A fat little old lady was standing at the 
door of a cab, helping the driver to extricate what seemed 
an exact duplicate of herself: it would have been no easy 
task to decide which was the fatter or which looked the 
more good-humoured of the two sisters. 

"I tell you the cab-door isn’t half wide enough!” she 
repeated, as her sister finally emerged, somewhat after the 
fashion of a pellet from a pop-gun, and she turned to ap¬ 
peal to Clara. “Is it, dear?” she said, trying hard to bring 
a frown into a face that dimpled all over with smiles. 

“Some folks is too wide for ’em,” growled the cab- 
driver. 

“Don’t provoke me, man!” cried the little old lady, in 
what she meant for a tempest of fury. "Say another word 
and I’ll put you into the County Court, and sue you for 
a Habeas Corpus!” the cabman touched his hat, and 
marched off, grinning. 

"Nothing like a little Law to cow the ruffians, my 
dear!” she remarked confidentially to Clara. "You saw 
how he quailed when I mentioned the Habeas Corpus? 
Not that I’ve any idea what it means, but it sounds very 
grand, doesn’t it?” 

"It’s very provoking,” Clara replied, a little vaguely. 

"Very!” the little old lady eagerly replied. “And we’re 
very much provoked indeed. Aren’t we, sister?” 

"I never was so provoked in all my life!” the fatter 
sister assented radiantly. 

By this time Clara had recognized her picture-gallery 
acquaintances, and, drawing her aunt aside, she hastily 
whispered her reminiscences. “I met them first in the 
Royal Academy—and they were very kind to me—and 
they were lunching at the next table to us, just now, you 
know—and they tried to help me to find the picture I 
wanted—and I’m sure they’re dear old things!” 

"Friends of yours, are they?” said Mad Mathesis. "Well 



A TANGLED TALE 


907 

I like their looks. You can be civil to them, while I get 
the tickets. But do try and arrange your ideas a little 
more chronologically!” 

And so it came to pass that the four ladies found them¬ 
selves seated side by side on the same bench waiting for 
the train, and chatting as if they had known one another 
for years. 

“Now this I call quite a remarkable coincidence!” ex¬ 
claimed the smaller and more talkative of the two sisters 
—the one whose legal knowledge had annihilated the cab- 
driver. “Not only that we should be waiting for the same 
train, and at the same station —that would be curious 
enough—but actually on the same day, and the same 
hour of the day! That’s what strikes me so forcibly!” She 
glanced at the fatter and more silent sister, whose chief 
function in life seemed to be to support the family 
opinion, and who meekly responded: 

“And me too, sister!” 

“Those are not independent coincidences-” Mad 

Mathesis was just beginning, when Clara ventured to 
interpose. 

"There’s no jolting here,” she pleaded meekly. “Would 
you mind writing it down now?” 

Out came the ivory tablets once more. “What was it, 
then?” said her aunt. 

“One glass of lemonade, one sandwich, one biscuit— 
Oh, dear me!” cried poor Clara, the historical tone sud¬ 
denly changing to a wail of agony. 

“Toothache?” said her aunt calmly, as she wrote down 
the items. The two sisters instantly opened their reticules 
and produced two different remedies for neuralgia, each 
marked “unequalled”. 

“It isn’t that!” said poor Clara. “Thank you very 
much. It’s only that I ca’n’t remember how much I paid!” 

“Well, try and make it out, then,” said her aunt. 
“You’ve got yesterday’s luncheon to help you, you know. 
And here’s the luncheon we had the day before—the first 
day we went to that shop —one glass lemonade, four sand- 



STORIES 


908 

wiches, ten biscuits. Total, one-and-fivepence.” She handed 
the tablets to Clara, who gazed at them with eyes so dim 
with tears that she did not at first notice that she was 
holding them upside down. 

The two sisters had been listening to all this with the 
deepest interest, and at this juncture the smaller one 
softly laid her hand on Clara’s arm. 

"Do you know, my dear,” she said coaxingly, "my 
sister and I are in the very same predicament! Quite 
identically the very same predicament! Aren’t we, sis¬ 
ter?” 

"Quite identically and absolutely the very-” began 

the fatter sister, but she was constructing her sentence on 
too large a scale, and the little one would not wait for her 
to finish it. 

"Yes, my dear,” she resumed; “we were lunching at the 
very same shop as you were—and we had two glasses of 
lemonade and three sandwiches and five biscuits—and 
neither of us has the least idea what we paid. Have we, 
sister?” 

“Quite identically and absolutely-” murmured the 

other, who evidently considered that she was now a 
whole sentence in arrears, and that she ought to dis¬ 
charge one obligation before contracting any fresh 
liabilities; but the little lady broke in again, and she 
retired from the conversation a bankrupt. 

“Would you make it out for us, my dear?” pleaded the 
little old lady. 

"You can do Arithmetic, I trust?” her aunt said, a 
little anxiously, as Clara turned from one tablet to an¬ 
other, vainly trying to collect her thoughts. Her mind was 
a blank, and all human expression was rapidly fading out 
of her face. 

A gloomy silence ensued. 



A TANGLED TALE 


909 


Knot VIII 
De Omnibus Rebus 

This little pig went to market: 

This little pig staid at home. 

“By Her Radiancy’s express command,” said the Gov¬ 
ernor, as he conducted the travelers, for the last time, 
from the Imperial presence, “I shall now have the ecstasy 
of escorting you as far as the outer gate of the Military 
Quarter, where the agony of parting—if indeed Nature 
can survive the shock—must be endured! From that gate 
grurmstipths start every quarter of an hour, both 
ways-” 

“Would you mind repeating that word?” said Nor¬ 
man. “Grurm-?” 

“Grurmstipths,” the Governor repeated. “You call 
them omnibuses in England. They run both ways, and 
you can travel by one of them all the way down to the 
harbour.” 

The old man breathed a sigh of relief; four hours of 
courtly ceremony had wearied him, and he had been in 
constant terror lest something should call into use the 
ten thousand additional bamboos. 

In another minute they were crossing a large quad¬ 
rangle, paved with marble, and tastefully decorated with 
a pigsty in each corner. Soldiers, carrying pigs, were 
marching in all directions: and in the middle stood a 
gigantic officer giving orders in a voice of thunder, which 
made itself heard above all the uproar of the pigs. 

“It is the Commander-in-Chief!” the Governor hur¬ 
riedly whispered to his companions, who at once followed 
his example in prostrating themselves before the great 
man. The Commander gravely bowed in return. He was 
covered with gold lace from head to foot: his face wore 
an expression of deep misery: and he had a little black 



STORIES 


910 

pig under each arm. Still the gallant fellow did his best, 
in the midst of the orders he was every moment issuing 
to his men, to bid a courteous farewell to the departing 
guests. 

“Farewell, 0 old one!—carry these three to the South 
corner—and farewell to thee, thou young one—put this 
fat one on the top of the others in the Western sty—may 
your shadows never be less—woe is me, it is wrongly 
done! Empty out all the sties, and begin again!” And the 
soldier leant upon his sword, and wiped away a tear. 

"He is in distress,” the Governor explained as they left 
the court. “Her Radiancy has commanded him to place 
twenty-four pigs in those four sties, so that, as she goes 
round the court, she may always find the number in each 
sty nearer to ten than themumber in the last.” 

“Does she call ten nearer to ten than nine is?” said 
Norman. 

“Surely,” said the Governor. “Her Radiancy would 
admit that ten is nearer to ten than nine is—and also 
nearer than eleven is.” 

“Then I think it can be done,” said Norman. 

The Governor shook his head. “The Commander has 
been transferring them in vain for four months,” he said. 
“What hope remains? And Her Radiancy has ordered up 
ten thousand additional-” 

“The pigs don’t seem to enjoy being transferred,” the 
old man hastily interrupted. He did not like the subject 
of bamboos. 

“They are only provisionally transferred, you know,” 
said the Governor. “In most cases they are immediately 
carried back again: so they need not mind it. And all is 
done with the greatest care, under the personal super¬ 
intendence of the Commander-in-Chief.” 

"Of course she would only go once round?” said Nor¬ 
man. 

“Alas, no!” sighed their conductor. “Round and round. 
Round and round. These are Her Radiancy’s own words. 
But oh, agony! Here is the outer gate, and we must part!” 



A TANGLED TALE gil 

He sobbed as he shook hands with them, and the next 
moment was briskly walking away. 

“He might have waited to see us off!’’ said the old man 
piteously. 

“And he needn’t have begun whistling the very mo¬ 
ment he left us!’’ said the young one severely. “But look 
sharp—here are two what’s-his-names in the act of start¬ 
ing!’’ 

Unluckily, the sea-bound omnibus was full. “Never 
mind!” said Norman cheerily. “We’ll walk on till the 
next one overtakes us.” 

They trudged on in silence, both thinking over the 
military problem, till they met an omnibus coming from 
the sea. The elder traveler took out his watch. “Just 
twelve minutes and a half since we started,” he remarked 
in an absent manner. Suddenly the vacant face bright¬ 
ened; the old man had an idea. “My boy!” he shouted, 
bringing his hand down upon Norman’s shoulder so sud¬ 
denly as for a moment to transfer his centre of gravity 
beyond the base of support. 

Thus taken off his guard, the young man wildly stag¬ 
gered forwards, and seemed about to plunge into space: 
but in another moment he had gracefully recovered him¬ 
self. “Problem in Precession and Nutation,” he remarked 
—in tones where filial respect only just managed to con¬ 
ceal a shade of annoyance. “What is it?” he hastily 
added, fearing his father might have been taken ill. “Will 
you have some brandy?” 

“When will the next omnibus overtake us? When? 
When?” the old man cried, growing more excited every 
moment. 

Norman looked gloomy. “Give me time,” he said. “I 
must think it over.” And once more the travelers passed 
on in silence—a silence only broken by the distant squeals 
of the unfortunate little pigs, who were still being provi¬ 
sionally transferred from sty to sty, under the personal 
superintendence of the Commander-in-Chief. 



912 


STORIES 


Knot IX 

A Serpent with Corners 

Water, water, everywhere, 

Nor any drop to drink. 

“It’ll just take one more pebble.” 

“Whatever are you doing with those buckets?” 

The speakers were Hugh and Lambert. Place, the beach 
of Little Mendip. Time 1:30 p.m. Hugh was floating a 
bucket in another a size larger, and trying how many 
pebbles it would carry without sinking. Lambert was 
lying on his back, doing nothing. 

For the next minute or two Hugh was silent, evidently 
deep in thought. Suddenly he started. “I say, look here, 
Lambert!” he cried. 

“If it's alive, and slimy, and with legs, I don’t care to,” 
said Lambert. 

“Didn’t Balbus say this morning that, if a body is im¬ 
mersed in liquid it displaces as much liquid as is equal to 
its own bulk?” said Hugh. 

“He said things of that sort,” Lambert vaguely replied. 

“Well, just look here a minute. Here’s the little bucket 
almost quite immersed: so the water displaced ought to 
be just about the same bulk. And now just look at it!” 
He took out the little bucket as he spoke, and handed 
the big one to Lambert. “Why, there’s hardly a teacup¬ 
ful! Do you mean to say that water is the same bulk as 
the little bucket?” 

“Course it is,” said Lambert. 

“Well, look here again!” cried Hugh, triumphantly, as 
he poured the water from the big bucket into the little 
one. “Why, it doesn’t half fill it!” ^ 

“That’s its business,” said Lambert. “If Balbus says 
it’s the same bulk, why, it is the same bulk, you know.” 

“Well, I don’t believe it,” said Hugh. 



A TANGLED TALE 913 

“You needn’t,” said Lambert. “Besides, it’s dinner¬ 
time. Come along.” 

They found Balbus waiting dinner for them, and to 
him Hugh at once propounded his difficulty. 

“Let’s get you helped first,” said Balbus, briskly cut¬ 
ting away at the joint. “You know the old proverb, 
‘Mutton first, mechanics afterwards’ ? ” 

The boys did not know the proverb, but they accepted 
it in perfect good faith, as they did every piece of infor¬ 
mation, however startling, that came from so infallible an 
authority as their tutor. They ate on steadily in silence, 
and, when dinner was over, Hugh set out the usual array 
of pens, ink, and paper, while Balbus repeated to them 
the problem he had prepared for their afternoon’s task. 

“A friend of mine has a flower-garden—a very pretty 
one, though no great size-” 

“How big is it?” said Hugh. 

“That’s what you have to find out!” Balbus gaily re¬ 
plied. “All I tell you is that it is oblong in shape—just 
half a yard longer than its width—and that a gravel- 
walk, one yard wide, begins at one corner and runs all 
round it.” 

“Joining into itself?” said Hugh. 

“Not joining into itself, young man. Just before doing 
that, it turns a corner, and runs round the garden again, 
alongside of the first portion, and then inside that again, 
winding in and in, and each lap touching the last one, 
till it has used up the whole of the area.” 

“Like a serpent with corners?” said Lambert. 

“Exactly so. And if you walk the whole length of it, to 
the last inch, keeping in the centre of the path, it’s exactly 
two miles and half a furlong. Now, while you find out 
the length and breadth of the garden, I’ll see if I can 
think out that sea-water puzzle.” 

“You said it was a flower-garden?” Hugh inquired, as 
Balbus was leaving the room. 

“I did,” said Balbus. 

“Where do the flowers grow?” said Hugh. But Balbus 



STORIES 


914 

thought it best not to hear the question. He left the boys 
to their problem, and, in the silence of his own room, 
set himself to unravel Hugh’s mechanical paradox. 

“To fix our thoughts,” he murmured to himself, as, 
with hands deep-buried in his pockets, he paced up and 
down the room, "we will take a cylindrical glass jar, with 
a scale of inches marked up the side, and fill it with water 
up to the 10-inch mark: and we will assume that every 
inch depth of jar contains a pint of water. We will now 
take a solid cylinder, such that every inch of it is equal 
in bulk to half a pint of water, and plunge 4 inches of it 
into the water, so that the end of the cylinder comes down 
to the 6-inch mark. Well, that displaces 2 pints of water. 
What becomes of them? Why, if there were no more 
cylinder, they would lie comfortably on the top, and fill 
the jar up to the 12-inch mark. But unfortunately there 
is more cylinder, occupying half the space between the 
10-inch and the 12-inch marks, so that only one pint of 
water can be accommodated there. What becomes of the 
other pint? Why, if there were no more cylinder, it would 
lie on the top, and fill the jar up to the 13-inch mark. 
But unfortunately—Shade of Newton!” he exclaimed, in 
sudden accents of terror. “When does the water stop 
rising?” 

A bright idea struck him. “I’ll write a little essay on it,” 
he said. 


Balbus’s Essay 

“When a solid is immersed in a liquid, it is well known 
that it displaces a portion of the liquid equal to itself in 
bulk, and that the level of the liquid rises just so much 
as it would rise if a quantity of liquid had been added 
to it, equal in bulk to the solid. Lardner says precisely the 
same process occurs when a solid is partially immersed: 
the quantity of liquid displaced, in this case, equalling the 
portion of the solid which is immersed, and the rise of 
the level being in proportion. 



A TANGLED TALE 915 

“Suppose a solid held above the surface of a liquid and 
partially immersed: a portion of the liquid is displaced, 
and the level of the liquid rises. But, by this rise of level, 
a little bit more of the solid is of course immersed, and so 
there is a new displacement of a second portion of the 
liquid, and a consequent rise of level. Again, this second 
rise of level causes a yet further immersion, and by con¬ 
sequence another displacement of liquid and another rise. 
It is self-evident that this process must continue till the 
entire solid is immersed, and that the liquid will then 
begin to immerse whatever holds the solid, which, being 
connected with it, must for the time be considered a part 
of it. If you hold a stick, six feet long, with its ends in 
a tumbler of water, and wait long enough, you must 
eventually be immersed. The question as to the source 
from which the water is supplied—which belongs to a 
high branch of mathematics, and is therefore beyond our 
present scope—does not apply to the sea. Let us there¬ 
fore take the familiar instance of a man standing at the 
edge of the sea, at ebb-tide, with a solid in his hand, 
which he partially immerses: he remains steadfast and 
unmoved, and we all know that he must be drowned. 
The multitudes who daily perish in this manner to attest 
a philosophical truth, and whose bodies the unreasoning 
wave casts sullenly upon our thankless shores, have a 
truer claim to be called the martyrs of science than a 
Galileo or a Kepler. To use Kossuth’s eloquent phrase, 
they are the unnamed demigods of the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury.” 1 

“There’s a fallacy somewhere,” he murmured drowsily, 
as he stretched his long legs upon the sofa. “I must think 
it over again.” He closed his eyes, in order to concentrate 
his attention more perfectly, and for the next hour or so 
his slow and regular breathing bore witness to the care¬ 
ful deliberation with which he was investigating this new 
and perplexing view of the subject. 

1 Note by the writer .—For the above essay I am indebted to a 
dear friend, now deceased. 



STORIES 


916 


Knot X 
Chelsea Buns 

Yea, buns, and buns, and buns! 

Old Song. 

“How very, very sad!” exclaimed Clara; and the eyes 
of the gentle girl filled with tears as she spoke. 

"Sad—but very curious when you come to look at it 
arithmetically,” was her aunt’s less romantic reply. 
“Some of them have lost an arm in their country’s ser¬ 
vice, some a leg, some an ear, some an eye-” 

“And some, perhaps, all\” Clara murmured dreamily, 
as they passed the long rows of weather-beaten heroes 
basking in the sun. “Did you notice that very old one, 
with a red face, who was drawing a map in the dust with 
his wooden leg, and all the others watching? I think it 
was a plan of a battle-” 

“The Battle of Trafalgar, no doubt,” her aunt inter¬ 
rupted briskly. 

“Hardly that, I think,” Clara ventured to say. “You 
see, in that case, he couldn’t well be alive-” 

“Couldn’t well be alive!” the old lady contemptuously 
repeated. “He’s as lively as you and me put together! 
Why, if drawing a map in the dust—with one’s wooden 
leg—doesn’t prove one to be alive, perhaps you’ll kindly 
mention what does prove it!” 

Clara did not see her way out of it. Logic had never 
been her forte. 

“To return to the arithmetic,” Mad Mathesis resumed 
—the eccentric old lady never let slip an opportunity of 
driving her niece into a calculation—“what percentage 
do you suppose must have lost all four—a leg, an arm, an 
eye, and an ear?” 

"How can I tell?” gasped the terrified girl. She knew 
well what was coming. 



A TANGLED TALE 


917 

“You ca’n’t, of course, without data,” her aunt replied: 
“but I’m just going to give you-” 

“Give her a Chelsea bun, miss! That’s what most young 
ladies like best!” The voice was rich and musical, and 
the speaker dexterously whipped back the snowy cloth 
that covered his basket, and disclosed a tempting array 
of the familiar square buns, joined together in rows, 
richly egged and browned, and glistening in the sun. 

“No, sir! I shall give her nothing so indigestible! Be 
off!” The old lady waved her parasol threateningly: but 
nothing seemed to disturb the good humour of the jolly 
old man, who marched on, chanting his melodious refrain: 



-IS-—v-- 

iqs V- 

1 

j-r'— 

—1 -S-S—P* 

-0 .- 0 - 0 - 0 -. - 

-J- 8L . 

- 3 — 4 -J 


Chel - sea buns! Chel-sea buns hot! Chel - sea buns! 


'—y. 1 _ _ 



S t 

1/57 fir 0 • 0 0 




rtf) v | r, r 

m 0 0 - 

_ 



u 

-• 0 0 


Pi - ping hot! Chel - sea buns hot I Chel - sea buns! 

“Far too indigestible, my love!” said the old lady. 
“Percentages will agree with you ever so much better!” 

Clara sighed, and there was a hungry look in her eyes 
as she watched the basket lessening in the distance; but 
she meekly listened to the relentless old lady, who at once 
proceeded to count off the data on her fingers. 

“Say that 70 per cent have lost an eye—75 per cent an 
ear—80 per cent an arm—85 per cent a leg—that’ll do it 
beautifully. Now, my dear, what percentage, at least, 
must have lost all four?” 

No more conversation occurred—unless a smothered 
exclamation of, “Piping hot!” which escaped from Clara’s 
lips as the basket vanished round a corner could be 
counted as such—until they reached the old Chelsea 
mansion, where Clara’s father'was then staying, with his 
three sons and their old tutor. 

Balbus, Lambert, and Hugh had entered the house 




STORIES 


918 

only a few minutes before them. They had been out walk¬ 
ing, and Hugh had been propounding a difficulty which 
had reduced Lambert to the depths of gloom, and had 
even puzzled Balbus. 

“It changes from Wednesday to Thursday at midnight, 
doesn't it?” Hugh had begun. 

"Sometimes,” said Balbus cautiously. 

“Always,” said Lambert decisively. 

“Sometimes Balbus gently insisted. “Six midnights 
out of seven, it changes to some other name.” 

“I meant, of course,” Hugh corrected, “when it does 
change from Wednesday to Thursday, it does it at mid¬ 
night—and only at midnight.” 

“Surely,” said Balbus. Lambert was silent. 

“Well, now, suppose it’s midnight here in Chelsea. 
Then it’s Wednesday west of Chelsea (say in Ireland or 
America), where midnight hasn’t arrived yet: and it's 
Thursday east of Chelsea (say in Germany or Russia), 
where midnight has just passed by?” 

“Surely,” Balbus said again. Even Lambert nodded his 
time. 

“But it isn’t midnight anywhere else; so it ca’n't be 
changing from one day to another anywhere else. And 
yet, if Ireland and America and so on call it Wednesday, 
and Germany and Russia and so on call it Thursday, 
there must be some place—not Chelsea—that has differ¬ 
ent days on the two sides of it. And the worst of it is, the 
people there get their days in the wrong order: they’ve got 
Wednesday east of them, and Thursday west —just as if 
their day had changed from Thursday to Wednesday!” 

“I’ve heard that puzzle before!” cried Lambert. “And 
I’ll tell you the explanation. When a ship goes round the 
world from east to west, we know that it loses a day in its 
reckoning: so that when it gets home and calls its day 
Wednesday, it finds people here calling it Thursday, be¬ 
cause we’ve had one more midnight than the ship has had. 
And when you go the other way round you gain a day.” 

“I know all that,” said Hugh, in reply to this not very 



A TANGLED TALE 919 

lucid explanation: “but it doesn’t help me, because the 
ship hasn’t proper days. One way round, you get more 
than twenty-four hours to the day, and the other way you 
get less: so of course the names get wrong: but people that 
live on in one place always get twenty-four hours to the 
day.” 

“I suppose there is such a place,” Balbus said, medi¬ 
tatively, “though I never heard of it. And the people 
must find it queer, as Hugh says, to have the old day east 
of them, and the new one west : because, when midnight 
comes round to them, with the new day in front of it and 
the old one behind it, one doesn’t see exactly what hap¬ 
pens. I must think it over.” 

So they had entered the house in the state I have 
described—Balbus puzzled, and Lambert buried in 
gloomy thought. 

"Yes, m’m, Master is at home, m'm,” said the stately 
old butler. (N.B.—It is only a butler of experience who 
can manage a series of three M’s together, without any 
interjacent vowels.) “And the ole party is a-waiting for 
you in the libery.” 

“I don’t like his calling your father an old party,” Mad 
Mathesis whispered to her niece, as they crossed the hall. 
And Clara had only just time to whisper in reply, “He 
meant the whole party,” before they were ushered into 
the library, and the sight of the five solemn faces there 
assembled chilled her into silence. 

Her father sat at the head of the table, and mutely 
signed to the ladies to take the two vacant chairs, one on 
each side of him. His three sons and Balbus completed 
the party. Writing materials had been arranged round 
the table, after the fashion of a ghostly banquet: the but¬ 
ler had evidently bestowed much thought on the grim 
device. Sheets of quarto paper, each flanked by a pen on 
one side and a pencil on the other, represented the plates 
—penwipers did duty for rolls of bread—while ink-bottles 
stood in the places usually occupied by wine-glasses. The 
piece de resistance was a large green baize bag, which 



STORIES 


920 

gave forth, as the old man restlessly lifted it from side to 
side, a charming jingle, as of innumerable golden guineas. 

“Sister, daughter, sons—and Balbus-” the old man 

began, so nervously that Balbus put in a gentle “Hear, 
hear!” while Hugh drummed on the table with his fists. 

This disconcerted the unpractised orator. “Sister-” he 

began again, then paused a moment, moved the bag to 
the other side, and went on with a rush, "I mean—this 
being—a critical occasion—more or less—being the year 

when one of my sons comes of age--” he paused again 

in some confusion, having evidently got into the middle 
of his speech sooner than he intended: but it was too late 
to go back. “Hear, hear!” cried Balbus. “Quite so,” said 
the old gentleman, recovering his self-possession a little: 
“when first I began this annual custom—my friend Bal¬ 
bus will correct me if I am wrong-” (Hugh whispered, 

“With a strap!” but nobody heard him except Lambert, 
who only frowned and shook his head at him) “—this 
annual custom of giving each of my sons as many guineas 
as would represent his age—it was a critical time—so 
Balbus informed me—as the ages of two of you were to¬ 
gether equal to that of the third—so on that occasion I 

made a speech-” He paused so long that Balbus 

thought it well to come to the rescue with the words, “It 

was a most-” but the old man checked him with a 

warning look: “yes, made a speech,” he repeated. "A few 
years after that, Balbus pointed out—I say pointed 

out-” (“Hear, hear!” cried Balbus. “Quite so,” said 

the grateful old man.) “—that it was another critical 
occasion. The ages of two of you were together double 
that of the third. So I made another speech—another 
speech. And now again it’s a critical occasion—so Balbus 

says—and I am making-” (here Mad Mathesis 

pointedly referred to her watch) “all the haste I can!” 
the old man cried, with wonderful presence of mind. 
“Indeed, sister, I’m coming to the point now! The num¬ 
ber of years that have passed since that first occasion is 
just two-thirds of the numbers of guineas I then gave you. 



A TANGLED TALE 92I 

Now, my boys, calculate your ages from the data, and 
you shall have the money! ” 

“But we know our ages!’' cried Hugh. 

“Silence, sir!” thundered the old man, rising to his full 
height (he was exactly five-foot five) in his indignation. 
“I say you must use the data only! You mustn’t even 
assume which it is that comes of age!” He clutched the 
bag as he spoke, and with tottering steps (it was about as 
much as he could do to carry it) he left the room. 

"And you shall have a similar cadeau ", the old lady 
whispered to her niece, “when you’ve calculated that per¬ 
centage!” And she followed her brother. 

Nothing could exceed the solemnity with which the old 
couple had risen from the table, and yet was it—was it a 
grin with which the father turned away from his unhappy 
sons? Could it be—could it be a wink with which the 
aunt abandoned her despairing niece? And were those— 
were those sounds of suppressed chuckling which floated 
into the room, just before Balbus (who had followed them 
out) closed the door? Surely not: and yet the butler told 
the cook—but no, that was merely idle gossip, and I will 
not repeat it. 

The shades of evening granted their unuttered petition, 
and “closed not o’er” them (for the butler brought in the 
lamp): the same obliging shades left them a “lonely bark” 
(the wail of a dog, in the back-yard, baying the moon) 
for “a while”: but neither “morn, alas”, nor any other 
epoch, seemed likely to “restore” them—to that peace of 
mind which had once been theirs ere ever these problems 
had swooped upon them, and crushed them with a load 
of unfathomable mystery! 

“It’s hardly fair,” muttered Hugh, “to give us such a 
jumble as this to work out!” 

“Fair?” Clara echoed bitterly. “Well!” 

And to all my readers I can but repeat the last words 
of gentle Clara: 


Fare-well! 



922 


STORIES 


Appendix 

“A knot,” said Alice. ‘‘Oh, do let me help to undo it!” 

ANSWERS TO KNOT I 

Problem. —Two travelers spend from 3 o’clock till 9 in 
walking along a level road, up a hill, and home again: 
their pace on the level being 4 miles an hour, up hill 3, 
and down hill 6. Find the distance walked: also (within 
half an hour) time of teaching top of hill. 

Answer. —24 miles: half-past 6. 

Solution.- —A level mile takes \ of an hour, up hill 
down hill Hence to go and return over the same mile, 
whether on the level or on the hillside, takes \ an hour. 
Hence in 6 hours they went 12 miles out and 12 back. If 
the 12 miles out had been nearly all level, they would 
have taken a little over 3 hours; if nearly all up hill, a 
little under 4. Hence 3^ hours must be within \ an hour of 
the time taken in reaching the peak; thus, as they started 
at 3, they got there within | an hour of \ past 6. ' 

Twenty-seven answers have come in. Of these, 9 are 
right, 16 partially right, and 2 wrong. The 16 give the 
distance correctly, but they have failed to grasp the fact 
that the top of the hill might have been reached at any 
moment between 6 o’clock and 7. 

The two wrong answers are from Gerty Vernon and 
A Nihilist. The former makes the distance "23 miles”, 
while her revolutionary companion puts it at ”27”. 
Gerty Vernon says, "they had to go 4 miles along the 
plain, and got to the foot of the hill at 4 o’clock.” They 
might have done so, I grant; but you have no ground for 
saying they did so. "It was 7^ miles to the top of the hill, 
and they reached that at | before 7 o’clock.” Here you go 
wrong in your arithmetic, and I must, however reluctant¬ 
ly, bid you farewell. 7^ miles, at 3 miles an hour, would 
not require 2| hours. A Nihilist says, “Let x denote the 
whole number of miles; y the number of hours to hill-top; 



A TANGLED TALE 


923 

Zy —number of miles to hill-top, and * - 3 y =number of 
miles on the other side.” You bewilder me. The other side 
of what? “Of the hill,” you say. But then, how did they 
get home again? However, to accommodate your views 
we will build a new hostelry at the foot of the hill on the 
opposite side, and also assume (what I grant you is pos¬ 
sible, though it is not necessarily true) that there was no 
level road at all. Even then you go wrong. You say: 


> = 6 


x-3 y 


• 



.(ii).” 


I grant you (i), but I deny (ii): it rests on the assumption 
that to go part of the time at 3 miles an hour, and the rest 
at 6 miles an hour, comes to the same result as going the 
whole time at \\ miles an hour. But this would only be 
true if the “part” were in exact half, i.e. if they went up 
hill for 3 hours, and down hill for the other 3: which they 
certainly did not do. 

The sixteen who are partially right, are Agnes Bailey, 
F. K., Fifee, G. E. B., H. P., Kit, M. E. T.,Mysie, A 
Mother’s Son, Nairam, A Redruthian, A Socialist, 
Spear Maiden, T. B. C., Vis Inertia, and Yak. Of these, 
F. K., Fifee, T. B. C., and Vis Inertia do not attempt 
the second part at all. F. K. and H. P. give no working. 
The rest make particular assumptions, such as that there 
was no level road—that there were 6 miles of level road— 
and so on, all leading to particular times being fixed for 
reaching the hill-top. The most curious assumption is that 
of Agnes Bailey, who says, .‘‘Let x =number of hours 

x 

occupied in ascent; then -=hours occupied in descent; 

and —=hours occupied on the level.” I suppose you 
3 

were thinking of the relative rates, up hill and on the 



924 STORIES 

level; which we might express by saying that, if they went 

4X 

x miles up hill in a certain time, they would go — miles 

on the level in the same time. You have, in fact, assumed 
that they took the same time on the level that they took in 
ascending the hill. Fifee assumed that, when the aged 
knight said they had gone “four miles in the hour” on the 
level, he meant that four miles was the distance gone, not 
merely the rate. This would have been—if Fifee will ex¬ 
cuse the slang expression—a “sell”, ill-suited to the dig¬ 
nity of the hero. 

And now, “descend, ye classic Nine!” who have solved 
the whole problem, and let me sing your praises. Your 
names are Blithe, E. W., L. B., A Marlborough Boy, 
0 . V. L., Putney Walker, Rose, Sea-Breeze, Simple 
Susan, and Money-Spinner. (These last tw r o I count as 
one, as they send a joint answer.) Rose and Simple Susan 
and Co. do not actually state that the hill-top was 
reached sometime between 6 and 7, but, as they have 
clearly grasped the fact that a mile, ascended and 
descended, took the same time as two level miles, I mark 
them as “right”. A Marlborough Boy and Putney 
Walker deserve honourable mention for their algebraic 
solutions, being the only two who have perceived that the 
question leads to an indeterminate equation. E. W. brings 
a charge of untruthfulness against the aged knight—a 
serious charge, for he was the very pink of chivalry! She 
says, “According to the data given, the time at the sum¬ 
mit affords no clue to the total distance. It does not enable 
us to state precisely to an inch how much level and how 
much hill there was on the road.” “Fair damsel,” the aged 
knight replies, “—if, as I surmise, thy initials denote 
Early Womanhood—bethink thee that the word 'enable’ 
is thine, not mine. I did but ask the time of reaching the 
hill-top as my condition for further parley. If now thou 
wilt not grant that I am a truth-loving man, then will 
I affirm that those same initials denote Envenomed 
Wickedness!” 



A TANGLED TALE 


925 


CLASS LIST 
I 

A Marlborough Boy. Putney Walker. 


11 


Blithe. 
E. W. 

L. B. 

O. V. L. 


Rose. 

Sea-Breeze. 
Simple Susan. 
Money-Spinner. 


Blithe has made so ingenious an addition to the prob¬ 
lem, and Simple Susan and Co. have solved it in such 
tuneful verse, that I record both their answers in full. I 
have altered a word or two in Blithe’s— which I trust 
she will excuse; it did not seem quite clear as it stood. 


“Yet say,” said the youth, as a gleam of inspiration 
lighted up the relaxing muscles of his quiescent features. 
“Stay. Methinks it matters little when we reached that 
summit, the crown of our toil. For in the space of time 
wherein we clambered up one mile and bounded down 
the same on our return, we could have trudged the twain 
on the level. We have plodded, then, four-and-twenty 
miles in these six mortal hours; for never a moment did 
we stop for catching of fleeting breath or for gazing on 
the scene around!” 

“Very good,” said the old man. “Twelve miles out and 
twelve miles in. And we reached the top sometime be¬ 
tween six and seven of the clock. Now mark me! For 
every five minutes that had fled since six of the clock 
when we stood on yonder peak, so many miles had we 
toiled upwards on the dreary mountain-side!” 

The youth moaned and rushed into the hostel. 

Blithe. 

The elder and the younger knight 
They sallied forth at three; 

How far they went on level ground 
It matters not to me; 



926 


STORIES 


What time they reached the foot of hill, 

When they began to mount. 

Are problems which I hold to be 
Of very small account. 

The moment that each waved his hat 
Upon the topmost peak— 

To trivial query such as this 
No answer will I seek. 

Yet can I tell the distance well 
They must have travelled o’er: 

On hill and plain, ’twixt three and nine, 

The miles were twenty-four. 

Four miles an hour their steady pace 
Along the level track. 

Three when they climbed—but six when they 
Came swiftly striding back 
Adown the hill; and little skill 
It needs, methinks, to show, 

Up hill and down together told, 

Four miles an hour they go. 

For whether long or short the time 
Upon the hill they spent. 

Two thirds were passed in going up, 

One third in the descent. 

Two thirds at three, one third at six. 

If rightly reckoned o’er. 

Will make one whole at four—the tale 
Is tangled now no more. 

Simple Susan. 

Money-Spinner . 


ANSWERS TO KNOT II 

§ i. The Dinner Party 

Problem .—The Governor of Kgovjni wants to give a 
very small dinner party, and invites his father’s brother- 
in-law, his brother’s father-in-law, his father-in-law’s 



A TANGLED TALE 927 

brother, and his brother-in-law’s father. Find the number 
of guests. 

Answer. —One. 


In this genealogy, males 
are denoted by capitals, 
and females by small let¬ 
ters. 

The Governor is E and 
his guest is C. 


A = a 


b = B D = d C = c 


e = E 


g = G 


Ten answers have been received. Of these, one is wrong, 
Galanthus Nivalis Major, who insists on inviting two 
guests, one being the Governor's wife’s brother’s father. 
If she had taken his sister’s husband’s father instead, she 
would have found it possible to reduce the guests to one. 

Of the nine who send right answers, Sea-Breeze is the 
very faintest breath that ever bore the name! She simply 
states that the Governor’s uncle might fulfil all the con¬ 
ditions “by intermarriages”! “Wind of the western sea”, 
you have had a very narrow escape! Be thankful to ap¬ 
pear in the Class List at all! Bog-Oak and Bradshaw of 
the Future use genealogies which require 16 people 
instead of 14, by inviting the Governor’s father’s sister’s 
husband instead of his father’s wife’s brother. I cannot 
think this so good a solution as one that requires only 14. 
Caius and Valentine deserve special mention as the only 
two who have supplied genealogies. 


CLASS LIST 

1 

Bee. M. M. Old Cat. 

Caius. Matthew Matticks. Valentine. 


n 

Bradshaw of the Future. 


Bog-Oak. 



928 


STORIES 


III 

Sea-Breeze. 

§ 2. The Lodgings 

Problem .—A Square has 20 doors on each side, which 
contains 21 equal parts. They are numbered all round, 
beginning at one corner. From which of the four, Nos. 9, 
25, 5 2 > 73. is the sum of the distances, to the other three, 
least? 

Answer .—From No. 9. 


A 


9 

. 12 5 

8 

• 

13 

16 

9 - 

12 


C 


Let A be No. 9, B No. 25, C No. 52, and D No. 73. 

Then AB = ^ (12 2 + 5 2 ) = ^169 = 13; 

AC =21; 

AD = V(9 2 + 8 2 ) = 7145 = 12 + 

(N.B. i.e., "between 12 and 13") 

BC =J(i6 2 +12 2 ) = ^400 = 20; 

BD = J(s 2 + 21 2 ) = ^450 = 21 +; 

CD = V (9 2 +13 2 ) = J250 = 15 +; 

Hence the sum of distances from A is between 46 and 
47; fromB, between 54 and 55; from C, between 56 and 57; 
from D, between 48 and 51. (Why not "between 48 and 
49"? Make this out for yourselves.) Hence the sum is 
least for A. 

Twenth-five solutions have been received. Of these, 15 
must be marked "zero”, 5 are partly right, and 5 right. 




A TANGLED TALE 


929 

Of the 15, I may dismiss Alphabetical Phantom, Bog- 
Oak, Dinah Mite, Fifee, Galanthus Nivalis Major (I 
fear the cold spring has blighted our Snowdrop), Guy, 
H.M.S. Pinafore, Janet, and Valentine with the 
simple remark that they insist on the unfortunate lodgers 
keeping to the pavement. (I used the words “crossed to 
Number Seventy-three” for the special purpose of show¬ 
ing that short cuts were possible.) Sea-Breeze does the 
same, and adds that “the result would be the same” even 
if they crossed the Square, but gives no proof of this. 
M. M. draws a diagram, and says that No. 9 is the house, 
“as the diagram shows”. I cannot see how it does so. Old 
Cat assumes that the house must be No. 9 or No. 73. She 
does-not explain how she estimates the distances. Bee’s 
arithmetic is faulty: she makes ^169 + J442 + J130 
= 741. (I suppose you mean ^742, which would be a little 
nearer the truth. But roots cannot be added in this man¬ 
ner. Do you think Jg + J16 is 25, or even J 25?) But Ayr’s 
state is more perilous still: she draws illogical conclusions 
with a frightful calmness. After pointing out (rightly) 
that AC is less than BD, she says, “therefore the nearest 
house to the other three must be A or C.” And again, 
after pointing out (rightly) that B and D are both within 
the half-square containing A, she says, “therefore” 
AB + AD must be less than BC + CD. (There is no logical 
force in either “therefore”. For the first, try Nos. 1, 21, 
60, 70: this will make your premiss true, and your con¬ 
clusion false. Similarly, for the second, try Nos. 1, 30, 51, 
7 1 -) 

Of the five partly-right solutions, Rags and Tatters 
and Mad Hatter (who send one answer between them) 
make No. 25 6 units from the corner instead of 5. Cheam, 
E. R. D. L., and Meggy Potts leave openings at the cor¬ 
ners of the Square, which are not in the data: moreover 
Cheam gives values for the distances without any hint 
that they are only approximations. Crophi and Mophi 
make the bold and unfounded assumption that there were 
really 21 houses on each side, instead of 20 as stated by 



STORIES 


930 

Balbus. “We may assume”, they add, “that the doors of 
Nos. 21, 42, 63, 84, are invisible from the centre of the 
Square”! What is there, I wonder, that Crophi and 
Mophi would not assume? 

Of the five who are wholly right, I think Bradshaw 
of the Future, Caius, Clifton C., and Martreb deserve 
special praise for their full analytical solutions. Matthew 
Matticks picks out No. 9, and proves it to be the right 
house in two ways, very neatly and ingeniously, but why 
he picks it out does not appear. It is an excellent syn¬ 
thetical proof, but lacks the analysis which the other four 
supply. 


CLASS LIST 
I 

Bradshaw of the Future. 
Caius. 

Clifton C. 

Martreb. 


n 

Matthew Matticks. 


iii 

Cheam. Meggy Potts. 

Crophi and Mophi. JRags and Tatters. 

E. R. D. L. \Mad Hatter. 

A remonstrance has reached me from Scrutator on the 
subject of Knot I, which he declares was “no problem at 
all”. “Two questions”, he says, “are put. To solve one 
there is no data: the other answers itself.” As to the first 
point, Scrutator is mistaken; there are (not “is”) data 
sufficient to answer the question. As to the other, it is 
interesting to know that the question “answers itself”, 
and I am sure it does the question great credit: still I fear 



A TANGLED TALE 931 

I cannot enter it on the list of winners, as this competition 
is only open to human beings. 


ANSWERS TO KNOT III 

Problem. —(i) Two travelers, starting at the same time, 
went opposite ways round a circular railway. Trains start 
each way every 15 minutes, the easterly ones going round 
in 3 hours, the westerly in 2. How many trains did each 
meet on the way, not counting trains met at the terminus 
itself? (2) They went round, as before, each traveler 
counting as “one” the train containing the other traveler. 
How many did each meet ? 

Answers. —(1) 19. (2) The easterly traveler met 12; the 
other 8. 

The trains one way took 180 minutes, the other way 
120. Let us take the l.c.m., 360, and divide the railway 
into 360 units. Then one set of trains went at the rate of 
2 units a minute and at intervals of 30 units; the 
other at the rate of 3 units a minute and at intervals of 45 
units. An easterly train starting has 45 units between it 
and the first train it will meet: it does § of this while the 
other does f, and thus meets it at the end of 18 units, and 
so all the way round. A westerly train starting has 30 
units between it and the first train it will meet: it does -f 
of this while the other does f, and thus meets it at the end 
of 18 units, and so all the way round. Hence if the railway 
be divided, by 19 posts, into 20 parts, each containing 18 
units, trains meet at every post, and, in (1) each traveler 
passes 19 posts in going round, and so meets 19 trains. 
But, in (2), the easterly traveler only begins to count 
after traversing f of the journey, i.e. on reaching the 8th 
post, and so counts 12 posts: similarly, the other counts 
8. They meet at the end of f of 3 hours, or -§ of 2 hours, 
i.e. 72 minutes. 


Forty-five answers have been received. Of these, 12 are 
beyond the reach of discussion, as they give no working. 



STORIES 


932 

I can but enumerate their names, Ardmore, E. A., F. A.D., 
L. D., Matthew Matticks, M. E. T., Poo-Poo, and 
The Red Queen are all wrong. Beta and Rowena have 
got (i) right and (2) wrong. Cheeky Bob and Nairam 
give the right answers, but it may perhaps make the one 
less cheeky, and induce the other to take a less inverted 
view of things, to be informed that, if this had been a 
competition for a prize, they would have got no marks. 
(N.B.—I have not ventured to put E. A.’s name in full, 
as she only gave it provisionally, in case her answer 
should prove right.) 

Of the 33 answers for which the working is given, 10 
are wrong; 11 half-wrong and half-right; 3 right, except 
that they cherish the delusion that it was Clara who 
traveled in the easterly train—a point which the data do 
not enable us to settle; and 9 wholly right. 

The 10 wrong answers are from Bo-Peep, Financier, 
I. W. T., Kate B., M. A. H., Q. Y. Z., Sea-Gull, Thistle¬ 
down, Tom-quad, and an unsigned one. Bo-Peep rightly 
says that the easterly traveler met all trains which started 
during the 3 hours of her trip, as well as all which started 
during the previous 2 hours, i.e. all which started at the 
commencements of 20 periods of 15 minutes each; and she 
is right in striking out the one she met at the moment of 
starting; but wrong in striking out the last train, for she 
did not meet this at the terminus, but 15 minutes before 
she got there. She makes the same mistake in (2). Finan¬ 
cier thinks that any train, met for the second time, is not 
to be counted. I. W. T. finds, by a process which is not 
stated, that the travelers met at the end of 71 minutes 
and 26J seconds. Kate B. thinks the trains which are met 
on starting and on arriving are never to be counted, even 
when met elsewhere. Q. Y. Z. tries a rather complex alge¬ 
braic solution, and succeeds in finding the time of meet¬ 
ing correctly: all else is wrong. Sea-Gull seems to think 
that, in (1), the easterly train stood still for 3 hours; and 
says that, in (2) the travelers meet at the end of 71 
minutes 40 seconds. Thistledown nobly confesses to 



A TANGLED TALE 


933 

having tried no calculation, but merely having drawn a 
picture of the railway and counted the trains; in (i) she 
counts wrong; in (2) she makes them meet in 75 minutes. 
Tom-Quad omits (1); in (2) he makes Clara count the 
train she met on her arrival. The unsigned one is also 
unintelligible; it states that the travelers go “it more than 
the total distance to be traversed”! The “Clara” theory, 
already referred to, is adopted by 5 of these, viz., Bo- 
Peep, Financier, Kate B., Tom-Quad, and the name¬ 
less writer. 

The 11 half-right answers are from Bog-Oak, Bridget, 
Castor, Cheshire Cat, G. E. B., Guy, Mary, M. A. H., 
Old Maid, R. W., and Vendredi. All these adopt the 
“Clara” theory. Castor omits (1). Vendredi gets (1) 
right, but in (2) makes the same mistake as Bo-Peep. I 
notice in your solution a marvellous proportion-sum: 
“300 miles : 2 hours :: one mile : 24 seconds.” May I ven¬ 
ture to advise your acquiring, as soon as possible, an utter 
disbelief in the possibility of a ratio existing between 
miles and hour si Do not be disheartened by your two 
friends' sarcastic remarks on your “roundabout ways”. 
Their short method, of adding 12 and 8, has the slight 
disadvantage of bringing the answer wrong: even a “round¬ 
about” method is better than that! M. A. H., in (2), makes 
the travelers count “one” after they met, not when they 
met. Cheshire Cat and Old Maid get “20” as answer for 
(i), by forgetting to strike out the train met on arrival. 
The others all get “18” in various ways. Bog-Oak, Guy, 
and R. W. divide the trains which the westerly traveler 
has to meet into 2 sets, viz., those already on the line, 
which they (rightly) make “n”, and those which started 
during her 2 hours’ journey (exclusive of train met on 
arrival), which they (wrongly) make “7”; and they make 
a similar mistake with the easterly train. Bridget (right¬ 
ly) says that the westerly traveler met a train every 6 
minutes for 2 hours, but (wrongly) makes the number 
“20”; it should be "21”. G. E. B. adopts Bo-Peep’s 
method, but (wrongly) strikes out (for the easterly 



STORIES 


934 

traveler) the train which started at the commencement of 
the previous 2 hours. Mary thinks a train met on arrival 
must not be counted, even when met on a previous occa¬ 
sion. 

The 3 who are wholly right but for the unfortunate 
"Clara” theory, are F. Lee, G. S. C., and X. A. B. 

And now “descend, ye classic ten!” who have solved 
the whole problem. Your names are Aix-les-Bains, Al¬ 
gernon Bray (thanks for a friendly remark, which comes 
with a heart-warmth that not even the Atlantic could 
chill), Arvon, Bradshaw of the F uture, Fifee, H. L. R., 
J. L. 0 ., Omega, S. S. G., and Waiting for the Train. 
Several of these have put Clara, provisionally, into the 
easterly train: but they seem to have understood that the 
data do not decide that point. 

CLASS LIST 

I 

Aix-les-Bains. H. L. R. 

Algernon Bray. Omega. 

Bradshaw of the Future. S. S. G. 

Fifee. Waiting for the Train. 

II 

Arvon. J. L. O. 


iii 

F. Lee. G. S. C. X. A. B. 

ANSWERS TO KNOT IV 

Problem .—There are 5 sacks, of which Nos. 1, 2, weigh 
12 lbs.; Nos. 2, 3, 13! lbs.; Nos. 3, 4, nf lbs.; Nos. 4, 5, 
8 lbs.; Nos. 1, 3, 5, 16 lbs. Required the weight of each 
sack. 

Answer— 5 J, 6|, 7,4$, 3^. 

The sum of all the weighings, 61 lbs., includes sack No. 
3 thrice and each other twice. Deducting twice the sum 



A TANGLED TALE 935 

of the ist and 4th weighings, we get 21 lbs. for thrice No. 
3, i.e. 7 lbs. for No. 3. Hence, the 2nd and 3rd weighings 
give 6J lbs., 4! lbs. for Nos. 2, 4; and hence again, the 
ist and 4th weighings give 5| lbs., 3! lbs., for Nos. 1, 5. 

Ninety-seven answers have been received. Of these, 15 
are beyond the reach of discussion, as they give no work¬ 
ing. I can but enumerate their names, and I take this 
opportunity of saying that this is the last time I shall put 
on record the names of competitors who give no sort of 
clue to the process by which their answers were obtained. 
In guessing a conundrum, or in catching a flea, we do 
not expect the breathless victor to give us afterwards, in 
cold blood, a history of the mental or muscular efforts by 
which he achieved success; but a mathematical calcula¬ 
tion is another thing. The names of this “mute inglorious” 
band are Common Sense, D. E. R., Douglas, E. L., 
Ellen, I. M. T., J. M. C., Joseph, Knot I, Lucy, Meek, 
M. F. C., Pyramus, Shah, Veritas. 

Of the eighty-two answers with which the working, or 
some approach to it, is supplied, one is wrong: seventeen 
have given solutions which are (from one cause or an¬ 
other) practically valueless: the remaining sixty-four I 
shall try to arrange in a Class List, according to the vary¬ 
ing degrees of shortness and neatness to which they seem 
to have attained. 

The solitary wrong answer is from Nell. To be thus 
“alone in a crowd” is a distinction—a painful one, no 
doubt, but still a distinction. I am sorry for you, my dear 
young lady, and I seem to hear your tearful exclamation, 
when you read these lines, “Ah! This is the knell of all 
my hopes!” Why, oh why, did you assume that the 4th 
and 5th bags weighed 4 lbs. each? And why did you not 
test your answers? However, please try again: and please 
don’t change your nom-de-plume : let us have Nell in the 
First Class next time! 

The seventeen whose solutions are practically valueless 
are Ardmore, A Ready Reckoner, Arthur, Bog-Lark, 
Bog-Oak, Bridget, First Attempt, J. L. C., M. E. T., 



STORIES 


936 

Rose, Rowena, Sea-Breeze, Sylvia, Thistledown, 
Three-Fifths Asleep, Vendredi, and Winifred. Bog- 
Lark tries it by a sort of “rule of false”, assuming experi¬ 
mentally that Nos. 1, 2, weigh 6 lbs. each, and having thus 
produced 17I, instead of 16, as the weight of 1, 3, and 5, 
she removes “the superfluous pound and a half”, but does 
not explain how she knows from which to take it. Three- 
Fifths Asleep says that (when in that peculiar state) “it 
seemed perfectly clear” to her that, “3 out of the 5 sacks 
being weighed twice over, f of 45 =27, must be the total 
weight of the 5 sacks.” As to which I can only say, with 
the Captain, “it beats me entirely!” Winifred, on the 
plea that “one must have a starting-point”, assumes 
(what I fear is a mere guess) that No. 1 weighed 5| lbs. 
The rest all do it, wholly or partly, by guess-work. 

The problem is of course (as any algebraist sees at 
once) a case of “simultaneous simple equations”. It is, 
however, easily soluble by arithmetic only; and, when 
this is the case, I hold that it is bad workmanship to use 
the more complex method. I have not, this time, given 
more credit to arithmetical solutions; but in future prob¬ 
lems I shall (other things being equal) give the highest 
marks to those who use the simplest machinery. I have 
put into Class I those whose answers seemed specially 
short and neat, and into Class III those that seemed spe¬ 
cially long or clumsy. Of this last set, A. C. M., Furze- 
Bush, James, Partridge, R. W., and Waiting for the 
Train, have sent long wandering solutions, the substitu¬ 
tions have no definite method, but seeming to have been 
made to see what would come of it. Chilpome and Dub¬ 
lin Boy omit some of the working. Arvon Marlborough 
Boy only finds the weight of one sack. 

CLASS LIST 


B. E.D. 

C. H. 


1 


Number Five. 
Pedro. 



A TANGLED TALE 


937 


Constance Johnson. 

R. E. X. 

Greystead. 

Seven Old Men, 

Guy. 

Vis Inertle. 

Hoopoe. 

Willy B. 

J. F. A. 

Yahoo. 

M. A. H. 



ii 

American Subscriber. 

J.B.B. 

An Appreciative School- 

Kgovjni. 

ma'am. 

Ayr. 

Land Lubber. 

Bradshaw of the Future. 

L. D. 

Cheam. 

Magpie. 

C. M. G. 

Mary. 

Dinah Mite. 

Mhruxi. 

Duckwing. 

Minnie. 

E. C. M. 

Money-Spinner, 

E. N. Lowry. 

Nairam. 

Era. 

Old Cat. 

Euroclydon. 

POLICHINELLE. 

F. H. W. 

Simple Susan. 

Fifee. 

S. S. G. 

G. E. B. 

Tiiisbe. 

Harlequin. 

Verena. 

Hawthorn. 

Wamba. 

Hough Green. 

Wolfe. 

J. A. B. 

Wykehamicus. 

Jack Tar. 

Y. M. A. H. 


hi 


A. C. M. 

Arvon Marleborough Boy. 
Chilpome. 

Dublin Boy. 

Furze-Bush. 


James. 

Partridge. 

R. W. 

Waiting for the Train. 



938 


STORIES 


ANSWERS TO KNOT V 

Problem .—To mark pictures, giving 3 x’s to 2 or 3, 2 
to 4 or 5, and 1 to 9 or 10; also giving 3 o’s to 1 or 2, 2 to 
3 or 4, and 1 to 8 or 9; so as to mark the smallest possible 
number of pictures, and to give them the largest possible 
number of marks. 

Answer .—10 pictures; 29 marks; arranged thus: 


X 

X X 

X 

X X 

X X X 0 

X 

X X 

X 

X 

0 0 0 0 

X 

x 0 

0 

0 0 

0 0 0 0 

Solution .—By giving all the > 
brackets the optional ones, we 
thus: 

<’s possible, putting into 
get 10 pictures marked 

X 

X X 

X 

X X 

X X X ( X ) 

X 

X X 

X 

(X) 


X 

x (x) 





By then assigning o’s in the same way, beginning at 
the other end, we get 9 pictures marked thus: 

(o) o 
(o) 0 o o 
(0) 00000000 

All we have now to do is to run these two wedges as 
close together as they will go, so as to get the minimum 
number of pictures—erasing optional marks where by so 
doing we can run them closer, but otherwise letting them 
stand. There are 10 necessary marks in the 1st row, and 
in the 3rd; but only 7 in the 2nd. Hence we erase all 
optional marks in the 1st and 3rd rows, but let them stand 
in the 2nd. 

Twenty-two answers have been received. Of these, 11 
give no working; so, in accordance with what I announced 
in my last review of answers, I leave them unnamed, 
merely mentioning that 5 are right and 6 wrong. 

Of the eleven answers with which some working is 



A TANGLED TALE 


939 

supplied, 3 are wrong. C. H. begins with the rash asser¬ 
tion that under the given conditions “the sum is impos¬ 
sible. For”, he or she adds (these initialed correspondents 
are dismally vague beings to deal with: perhaps “it” 
would be a better pronoun), “io is the least possible num¬ 
ber of pictures J ’ (granted): "therefore we must either 
give 2 x's to 6, or 2 o's to 5”. Why "must,” O alphabetical 
phantom? It is nowhere ordained that every picture 
“must” have 3 marks! Fifee sends a folio page of solu¬ 
tion,which deserved a better fate: she offers three answers, 
in each of which 10 pictures are marked, with 30 marks; 
in one she gives 2 x’s to 6 pictures; in another to 7; in 
the third she gives 2 o’s to 5; thus in every case ignoring 
the conditions. (I pause to remark that the condition "2 
x’s to 4 or 5 pictures” can only mean “either to 4 or else 
to 5”: if, as one competitor holds, it might mean any 
number not less than 4, the words “or 5” would be super¬ 
fluous.) I. E. A. (I am happy to say that none of these 
bloodless phantoms appear this time in the class-list. Is 
it IDEA with the “D” left out?) gives 2 x's to 6 pictures. 
She then takes me to task for using the word “ought” 
instead of “nought”. No doubt, to one who thus rebels 
against the rules laid down for her guidance, the word 
must be distasteful. But does not I. E. A. remember the 
parallel case of “adder”? That creature was originally “a 
nadder”: then the two words took to bandying the poor 
“n” backwards and forwards like a shuttlecock, the final 
state of the game being “an adder”. May not “a nought” 
have similarly become “an ought”? Anyhow, “oughts 
and crosses” is a very old game. I don’t think I ever heard 
it called “noughts and crosses”. 

In the following Class List, I hope the solitary occupant 
of III will sheathe her claws when she hears how narrow 
an escape she has had of not being named at all. Her 
account of the process, by which she got the answer is so 
meagre that, like the nursery tale of “Jack-a-Minory” (I 
trust I. E. A. will be merciful to the spelling), it is scarcely 
to be distinguished from “zero”. 



940 


STORIES 


CLASS LIST 
I 

Guy. Old Cat. Sea-Breeze. 

ii 

Ayr. 

Bradshaw of the Future. 

hi 

Cat. 

ANSWERS TO KNOT VI 

Problem I .—A and B began the year with only £1000 
apiece. They borrowed nought; they stole nought. On 
the next New Year’s Day they had £60,000 between them. 
How did they do it ? 

Solution .—They went that day to the Bank of England* 
A stood in front of it, while B went round and stood be¬ 
hind it. 

Two answers have been received, both worthy of much 
honour. Addlepate makes them borrow “zero” and steal 
“zero”, and uses both cyphers by putting them at the 
righthand end of the £1000, thus producing £100,000, 
which j.s well over the mark. But (or to express it in 
Latin) At Spes Infracta has solved it even more ingeni¬ 
ously: with the first cypher she turns the "1” of the £1000 
into a “9”, and adds the result to the original sum, thus 
getting £10,000: and in this, by means of the other “zero”, 
she turns the “1” into a “6” thus hitting the exact £60,000. 

CLASS LIST 

1 

At Spes Infracta. 


F. Lee. 

H. Vernon. 



A TANGLED TALE 


941 


II 

Addlepate. 

Problem, 2 .—L makes 5 scarves, while M makes 2: Z 
makes 4, while L makes 3. Five scarves of Z’s weigh one 
of L’s; 5 of M’s weigh 3 of Z’s. One of M’s is as warm 
as 4 of Z’s and one of L’s as warm as 3 of M’s. Which is 
best, giving equal weight in the result of rapidity of work, 
lightness, and warmth? 

Answer .—The order is M, L, Z. 

Solution .—As to rapidity (other things being constant), 
L’s merit is to M’s in the ratio of 5 to 2: Z’s to L’s in the 
ratio of 4 to 3. In order to get one set of 3 numbers ful¬ 
filling these conditions, it is perhaps simplest to take the 
one that occurs twice as unity, and reduce the others to 
fractions: this gives, for L, M, and Z, the marks 1, §, §. 
In estimating for lightness, we observe that the greater the 
weight, the less the merit, so that Z’s merit is to L’s as 
5 to 1. Thus the marks for lightness are j, f, 1. And 
similarly, the marks for warmth are 3, 1, To get the 
total result, we must multiply L’s 3 marks together, and 
do the same for M and for Z. The final numbers are 
1x^x3, § x-f x 1, fxixj; i.e. f, f, $; i.e. multiplying 
throughout by 15 (which will not alter the proportion), 
9,10, 5; showing the order of merit to be M, L, Z. 

Twenty-nine answers have been received, of which five 
are right, and twenty-four wrong. These hapless ones 
have all (with three exceptions) fallen into the error of 
adding the proportional numbers together, for each can¬ 
didate, instead of multiplying. Why the latter is right, 
rather than the former, is fully proved in textbooks, so I 
will not occupy space by stating it here: but it can be il¬ 
lustrated very easily by the case of length, breadth, and 
depth. Suppose A and B are rival diggers of rectangular 
tanks: the amount of work done is evidently measured by 



STORIES 


942 

the number of cubical feet dug out. Let A dig a tank 10 
feet long, 10 wide, 2 deep: let B dig one 6 feet long, 5 
wide, 10 deep. The cubical contents are 200, 300; i.e. B 
is best digger in the ratio of 3 to 2. Now try marking for 
length, width, and depth, separately; giving a maximum 
mark of 10 to the best in each contest, and then adding 
the results! 

Of the twenty-four malefactors, one gives no working, 
and so has no real claim to be named; but I break the rule 
for once, in deference to its success in Problem 1: he, she, 
or it, is Addlepate. The other twenty-three may be di¬ 
vided into five groups. 

First and worst are, I take it, those who put the rightful 
winner last ; arranging them as “Lolo, Zuzu, Mimi”. The 
names of these desperate wrong-doers are Ayr, Brad¬ 
shaw of the Future, Furze-Bush, and Pollux (who 
send a joint answer), Greystead, Guy, Old Hen, and 
Simple Susan. The latter was once best of all; the Old 
Hen has taken advantage of her simplicity, and beguiled 
her with the chaff which was the bane of her own chicken- 
hood. 

Secondly, I point the finger of scorn at those who have 
put the worst candidate at the top; arranging them as 
“Zuzu, Mimi, Lolo”. They are Gracia, M. M., Old Cat, 
and R. E. X. “ Tis Greece, but-” 

The third set have avoided both these enormities, and 
have even succeeded in putting the worst last, their 
answer being “Lolo, Mimi, Zuzu”. Their names are Ayr 
(who also appears among the “quite too too”), Clifton C., 
F. B., Fifee, Grig, Janet, and Mrs. Sairey Gamp. 
F. B. has not fallen into the common error; she multiplies. 
together the proportionate number she gets, but in getting 
them she goes wrong, by reckoning warmth as a de-merit. 
Possibly she is “Freshly Burnt”, or comes “From Bom¬ 
bay”. Janet and Mrs. Sairey Gamp have also avoided 
this error: the method they have adopted is shrouded in 
mystery—I scarcely feel competent to criticise it. Mrs. 
Gamp says, “If Zuzu makes 4 while Lolo makes 3, Zuzu 



A TANGLED TALE 943 

makes 6 while Lolo makes 5 [bad reasoning], while 
Mimi makes 2.” From this she concludes, “Therefore 
Zuzu excels in speed by 1” (i.e. when compared with 
Lolo? but what about Mimi?). She then compares the 
3 kinds of excellence, measured on this mystic scale. 
Janet takes the statement that “Lolo makes 5 while Mi¬ 
mi makes 2”, to prove that “Lolo makes 3 while Mimi 
makes 1 and Zuzu 4” (worse reasoning than Mrs. Gamp’s), 
and thence concludes that “Zuzu excels in speed by |”! 
Janet should have been Adeline, “mystery of mys¬ 
teries!” 

The fourth set actually put Mimi at the top, arranging 
them as “Mimi, Zuzu, Lolo”. They are Marquis and Co., 
Martreb, S. B. B. (first initial scarcefy legible: may be 
meant for “J”), and Stanza. 

The fifth set consists of An Ancient Fish and Camel. 
These ill-assorted comrades, by dint of foot and fin, have 
scrambled into the right answer, but, as their method is 
wrong, of course it counts for nothing. Also An Ancient 
Fish has very ancient and fishlike ideas as to how 
numbers represent merit: she says, “Lolo gains 2f on 
Mimi.” Two and a half what ? Fish, fish, art thou in thy 
duty? 

Of the five winners I put Balbus and The Elder 
Traveller slightly below the other three— Balbus for 
defective reasoning, the other for scanty working. Balbus 
gives two reasons for saying that addition of marks is not 
the right method, and then adds, “It follows that the 
decision must be made by multiplying the marks to¬ 
gether”. This is hardly more logical than to say, “This is 
not Spring: therefore it must be Autumn”. 


CLASS LIST 

1 


Dinah Mite. 


E. B. D. L. 


JORAM. 



944 


STORIES 


II 

Balbus. The Elder Traveller. 

With regard to Knot V, I beg to express to Vis Inertle 
and to any others, who, like her, understood the condition 
to be that every marked picture must have three marks, 
my sincere regret that the unfortunate phrase “fill the 
columns with oughts and crosses” should have caused 
them to waste so much time and trouble. I can only re¬ 
peat that a literal interpretation of “fill” would seem to 
me to require that every picture in the gallery should be 
marked. Vis Inertle would have been in the First Class 
if she had sent in the solution she now offers. 

ANSWERS TO KNOT VII 

Problem. —Given that one glass of lemonade, 3 sand¬ 
wiches, and 7 biscuits, cost is. 2d.) and that one glass of 
lemonade, 4 sandwiches, and 10 biscuits, cost is. 5 d.: find 
the cost of (1) a glass of lemonade, a sandwich, and a 
biscuit; and (2) 2 glasses of lemonade, 3 sandwiches, and 
5 biscuits. 

Answer. —(1) 8 d.) (2) is. 7 d. 

Solution. —This is best treated algebraically. Let x = 
the cost (in pence) of a glass of lemonade, y of a sandwich, 
and 2 of a biscuit. Then we have ^+33/4-72 = 14, and 
x+4y +10 z = 17. And we require the values of x +y +z, 
and of 2#+ 33/+ 52. Now, from two equations only, we 
cannot find, separately, the values of three unknowns: 
certain combinations of them may, however, be found. 
Also we know that we can, by the help of the given 
equations, eliminate 2 of the 3 unknowns from the quan¬ 
tity whose value is required, which will then contain one 
only. If, then, the required value is ascertainable at all, 
it can only be by the 3rd unknown vanishing of itself: 
otherwise the problem is impossible. 

Let us then eliminate lemonade and sandwiches, and 
reduce everything to biscuits—a state of things even more 



A TANGLED TALE 


945 

depressing than “if all the world were apple-pie”—by sub¬ 
tracting the ist equation from the 2nd, which eliminates 
lemonade, and gives y + 3z=3, or _y =3 — 3^; and then 
substituting this value of y in the ist, which gives 
x-2z = 3, i.e. x=5 + 2 z. Now if we substitute these 
values of x, y, in the quantities whose values are required, 
the first becomes (5 + 2z) + (3 — $z) + z, i.e. 8: and the 
second becomes 2 (5 + 2z) +3(3 -32) + 52:, i.e. 19. Hence 
the answers are (1) 8 d., (2) is. yd. 

The above is a universal method: that is, it is absolutely 
certain either to produce the answer, or to prove that no 
answer is possible. The question may also be solved by 
combining the quantities whose values are given, so as to 
form those whose values are required. This is merely a 
matter of ingenuity and good luck: and as it may fail, 
even when the thing is possible, and is of no use in proving 
it impossible, I cannot rank this method as equal in value 
with the other. Even when it succeeds, it may prove a 
very tedious process. Suppose the 26 competitors who 
have sent in what I may call accidental solutions, had had 
a question to deal with where every number contained 8 
or 10 digits! I suspect it would have been a case of “silver¬ 
ed is the raven hair” (see Patience ) before any solution 
would have been hit on by the most ingenious of them. 

Forty-five answers have come in, of which 44 give, I 
am happy to say, some sort of working, and therefore de¬ 
serve to be mentioned by name, and to have their virtues, 
or vices, as the case may be, discussed. Thirteen have 
made assumptions to which they have no right, and so 
cannot figure in the Class List, even though, in 10 of the 
12 cases, the answer is right. Of the remaining 28, no less 
than 26 have sent in accidental solutions, and therefore 
fall short of the highest honours. 

I will now discuss individual cases, taking the worst 
first, as my custom is. 

Froggy gives no working—at least this is all he gives: 
after stating the given equations, he says, “Therefore the 

L.C. 


2 H 



STORIES 


946 


difference, 1 sandwich+ 3 biscuits, = 3c?.”: then follow 
the amounts of the unknown bills, with no further hint as 
to how he got them. Froggy has had a very narrow escape 
of not being named at all! 

Of those who are wrong, Vis Inertia has sent in a piece 
of incorrect working. Peruse the horrid details, and 
shudder! She takes x (call it “y”) as the cost of a sand¬ 
wich, and concludes (rightly enough) that a biscuit will 

3 ~y 

cost She then subtracts the second equation from 

3 —y 3 —y 

the first, and deduces 3 y+yx —— — 4y + 10 x —— =3. 
By making two mistakes in this line, she brings out 


y =-. Try it again, O Vis Inertia! Away with Inertia: 
2 


infuse a little more Vis: and you will bring out the correct 
(though uninteresting) result, 0=0! This will show you 
that it is hopeless to try to coax any one of these 3 un¬ 
knowns to reveal its separate value. The other competitor 
who is wrong throughout, is either J. M. C. or T. M. C.: 
but, whether he be a Juvenile Mis-Calculator or a True 
Mathematician Confused, he makes the answers yd. and 
is. 5 d. He assumes with Too Much Confidence, that bis¬ 
cuits were \d. each, and that Clara paid for 8, though she 
only ate 7! 

We will now consider the 13 whose working is wrong, 
though the answer is right: and, not to measure their de¬ 
merits too exactly, I will take them in alphabetical order, 
Anita finds (rightly) that “1 sandwich and 3 biscuits cost 
3 d.” and proceeds, "therefore 1 sandwich = i\d., 3 bis¬ 
cuits =i|i., 1 lemonade =6d.” Dinah Mite begins like 
Anita: and thence proves (rightly) that a biscuit costs 
less than id.: whence she concludes (wrongly) that it 
must cost \d. F. C. W. is so beautifully resigned to the 
certainty of a verdict of "guilty”, that I have hardly the 
heart to utter the word, without adding a "recommended 
to mercy owing to extenuating circumstances”. But really, 



A TANGLED TALE 947 

you know, where are the extenuating circumstances? She 
begins by assuming that lemonade is 4 d. a glass, and 
sandwiches 3 d. each (making with the 2 given equations, 
four conditions to be fulfilled by three miserable un¬ 
knowns!) And, having (naturally) developed this into a 
contradiction, she then tries 5 d. and 2 d. with a similar re¬ 
sult. (N.B .—This process might have been carried on 
through the whole of the Tertiary Period, without grati¬ 
fying one single Megatherium.) She then, by a “happy 
thought”, tries halfpenny biscuits, and so obtains a con¬ 
sistent result. This may be a good solution, viewing the 
problem as a conundrum: but it is not scientific. Janet 
identifies sandwiches with biscuits! “One sandwich+ 3 
biscuits” she makes equal to “4”. Four what ? Mayfair 
makes the astounding assertion that the equation, s + 36 
= 3, “is evidently only satisfied by s=f, 6 =i”! Old 
Cat believes that the assumption that a sandwich costs 
1 %d. is "the only way to avoid unmanageable fractions”. 
But why avoid them? Is there not a certain glow of tri¬ 
umph in taming such a fraction? “Ladies and gentlemen, 
the fraction now before you is one that for years defied all 
efforts of a refining nature: it was, in a word, hopelessly 
vulgar. Treating it as a circulating decimal (the treadmill 
of fractions) only made matters worse. As a last resource, 
I reduced it to its lowest terms, and extracted its square 
root!” Joking apart, let me thank Old Cat for some very 
kind words of sympathy, in reference to a correspondent 
(whose name I am happy to say I have now forgotten) 
who had found fault with me as a discourteous critic. 
O. V. L. is beyond my comprehension. He takes the 
given equations as (1) and (2): thence, by the process 
[(2) -(1)], deduces (rightly) equation (3), viz., 8+36 = 3: 
and thence again, by the process [ x 3] (a hopeless mys¬ 
tery), deduces 35+46=4. I have nothing to say about 
it: I give it up. Sea-Breeze says, “It is immaterial to the 
answer” (why?) “in what proportion 3 d. is divided be¬ 
tween the sandwich and the 3 biscuits”: so she assumes 
s = i^i., b=\d. Stanza is one of a very irregular metre. 



STORIES 


948 

At first she (like Janet) identifies sandwiches with bis¬ 
cuits. She then tries two assumptions (s = i, b =§ and 
s = |, b =f,), and (naturally) ends in contradictions. Then 
she returns, to the first assumption, and finds the 3 un¬ 
knowns separately: quod est absurdum. Stiletto identifies 
sandwiches and biscuits, as “articles”. Is the word ever 
used by confectioners? I fancied, “What is the next 
article, ma’am?” was limited to linendrapers. Two Sis¬ 
ters first assume that biscuits are 4 a penny, and then 
that they are 2 a penny, adding that “the answer will of 
course be the same in both cases”. It is a dreamy remark, 
making one feel something like Macbeth grasping at the 
spectral dagger. “Is this a statement that I see before me ? ’’ 
If you were to say, “We both walked the same way this 
morning,” and I were to say, “One of you walked the 
same way, but the other didn’t,” which of the three would 
be the most hopelessly confused? Turtle Pyate (what is 
a Turtle Pyate, please?) and Old Crow, who send a joint 
answer, and Y. Y., adopt the same method. Y. Y. gets the 
equation 5 + 36=3: and then says, “This sum must be 
apportioned in one of the three following ways.” It may 
be, I grant you: but Y. Y. do you say “must”? I fear it is 
possible for Y. Y. to be two Y’s. The other two conspira¬ 
tors are less positive: they say it “can” be so divided: but 
they add “either of the three prices being right”! This is 
bad grammar and bad arithmetic at once, O mysterious 
birds! 

Of those who win honours. The Shetland Snark must 
have the Third Class all to himself. He has only answered 
half the question, viz. the amount of Clara’s luncheon: 
the two little old ladies he pitilessly leaves in the midst 
of their “difficulty”. I beg to assure him (with thanks 
for his friendly remarks) that entrance-fees and sub¬ 
scriptions are things unknown in that most economical 
of clubs, “The Knot-Untiers.” 

The authors of the 26 “accidental” solutions differ only 
in the number of steps they have taken between the data 
and the answers. In order to do them full justice I have 



A TANGLED TALE 


949 

arranged the Second Class in sections, according to the 
number of steps. The two Kings are fearfully deliberate! 
I suppose walking quick, or taking short cuts, is inconsis¬ 
tent with kingly dignity: but really, in reading Theseus’ 
solution, one almost fancied he was “marking time”, and 
making no advance at all! The other King will, I hope, 
pardon me for having altered “Coal” into “Cole”. King 
Coilus, or Coil, seems to have reigned soon after Arthur’s 
time. Henry of Huntingdon identifies him with the King 
Coel who first built walls round Colchester, which was 
named after him. In the Chronicle of Robert of Gloucester 
we read: 

Aftur Kyng Aruirag, of warn we habbeth y told, 
Marius ys sone was kyng, quoynte mon & bold. 

And ys sone was aftur hym, Coil was ys name, 

Bothe it were quoynte men, & of noble fame. 

Balbus lays it down as a general principle that “in 
order to ascertain the cost of any one luncheon, it must 
come to the same amount upon two different assump¬ 
tions”. {Query. Should not “it” be “we”? Otherwise the 
luncheon is represented as wishing to ascertain its own 
cost!) He then makes two assumptions—one, that sand¬ 
wiches cost nothing; the other, that biscuits cost nothing 
(either arrangement wo^ld lead to the shop being incon¬ 
veniently crowded!)—and brings out the unknown lun¬ 
cheons as Sd. and 19^. on each assumption. He then con¬ 
cludes that this agreement of results “shows that the 
answers are correct”. Now I propose to disprove his 
general law by simply giving one instance of its failing. 
One instance is quite enough. In logical language, in 
order to disprove a “universal affirmative”, it is enough 
to prove its contradictory, which is a “particular nega¬ 
tive”. (I must pause for a digression on Logic, and 
especially on Ladies’ Logic. The universal affirmative, 
“Everybody says he’s a duck,” is crushed instantly by 
proving the particular negative, “Peter says he’s a goose,” 
which is equivalent to “Peter does not say he’s a duck”. 



STORIES 


950 

And the universal negative, “Nobody calls on her,” is 
well met by the particular affirmative, "/ called yes¬ 
terday.” In short, either of two contradictories disproves 
the other: and the moral is that, since a particular pro¬ 
position is much more easily proved than a universal 
one, it is the wisest course, in arguing with a lady, to 
limit one’s own assertions to “particulars”, and leave her 
to prove the “universal” contradictory, if she can. You 
will thus generally secure a logical victory: a practical 
victory is not to be hoped for, since she can always fall 
back upon the crushing remark, “That has nothing to 
do with it!”—a move for which Man has not yet dis¬ 
covered any satisfactory answer. Now let us return to 
Balbus.) Here is my “particular negative”, on which 
to test his rule: Suppose the two recorded luncheons to 
have been “2 buns, one queen-cake, 2'Sausage-rolls, and a 
bottle of Zoedone: total, one-and-ninepence”, and “one 
bun, 2 queen-cakes, a sausage-roll, and a bottle of Zoe¬ 
done: total, one-and-fourpence”. And suppose Clara’s un¬ 
known luncheon to have been “3 buns, one queen-cake, 
one sausage-roll, and 2 bottles of Zoedone”: while the two 
little sisters had been indulging in “8 buns, 4 queen-cakes, 
2 sausage-rolls, and 6 bottles of Zoedone”. (Poor souls, 
how thirsty they must have been!) If Balbus will kindly 
try this by his principle of “two assumptions”, first as¬ 
suming that a bun is id. and a queen-cake 2d., and then 
that a bun is 3 d. and a queen-cake 3d, he will bring out 
the other two luncheons, on each assumption, as “one- 
and-ninepence” and “four-and-tenpence” respectively, 
which harmony of results, he will say, "shows that the 
answers are correct.” And yet, as a matter of fact, the 
buns were 2 d. each, the queen-cakes 3 d., the sausage-rolls 
6 d., and the Zoedone 2d. a bottle: so that Clara’s third 
luncheon had cost one-and-sevenpence, and her thirsty 
friends had spent four-and-fourpence! 

Another remark of Balbus I will quote and discuss: 
for I think that it also may yield a moral for some of my 
readers. He says, “It is the same thing in substance wheth- 



A TANGLED TALE 


951 

er in solving this problem we use words and call it arith¬ 
metic, or use letters and signs and call it algebra.” Now 
this does not appear to me a correct description of the two 
methods: the arithmetical method is that of “synthesis” 
only; it goes from one known fact to another, till it 
reaches its goal: whereas the algebraical method is that 
of “analysis”; it begins with the goal, symbolically repre¬ 
sented, and so goes backwards, dragging its veiled victim 
with it, till it has reached the full daylight of known facts, 
in which it can tear off the veil and say, “I know you!” 

Take an illustration: Your house has been broken into 
and robbed, and you appeal to the policeman who was on 
duty that night. “Well, mum, I did see a chap getting out 
over your garden wall: but I was a good bit off, so I didn’t 
chase him, like. I just cut down the short way to the 
‘Chequers’, and who should I meet but Bill Sykes, coming 
full split round the comer. So I just ups and says, ‘My 
lad, you’re wanted.’ That’s all I says. And he says, ‘I’ll go 
along quiet, Bobby,’ he says, ‘without the darbies,' he 
says.” There's your Arithmetical policeman. Now try the 
other method: “I seed somebody a-running, but he was 
well gone or ever I got nigh the place. So I just took a 
look round in the garden. And I noticed the footmarks, 
where the chap had come right across your flower-beds. 
They was good big footmarks sure-ly. And I noticed as 
the left foot went down at the heel, ever so much deeper 
than the other. And I says to myself, 'The chap’s been a 
big hulking chap: and he goes lame on his left foot’. And 
I rubs my hand on the wall where he got over, and there 
was soot on it, and no mistake. So I says to myself, ‘Now 
where can I light on a big man, in the chimbley-sweep 
line, what’s lame of one foot?’ And I flashes up permis- 
cuous: and I says, ‘It’s Bill Sykes!’ says I.” There is your 
Algebraical policeman—a higher intellectual type, to my 
thinking, than the other. 

Little Jack’s solution calls for a word of praise, as he 
has written out what really is an algebraical proof in 
words, without representing any of his facts as equations. 



STORIES 


952 

If it is all his own, he will make a good algebraist in the 
time to come. I beg to thank Simple Susan for some kind 
words of sympathy, to the same effect as those received 
from Old Cat. 

Hecla and Martreb are the only two who have used a 
method certain either to produce the answer, or else to 
prove it impossible: so they must share between them the 
highest honours. 


CLASS LIST 


Hecla. 


§ 1 (2 steps) 

Adelaide 
Clifton C.... 

E. K. C. 

Guy. 

L’Inconnu. 

Little Jack. 

Nil Desperandum. 

Simple Susan. 

Y ellow-Hammer. 
Woolly One. 

§ 2 (3 steps) 

A. A. 

A Christmas Carol. 
Afternoon Tea. 

An Appreciative School- 
ma’am. 

Baby. 

Balbus. 

Bog-Oak. 


Martreb. 


n 

§ 2 (3 steps )—continued 
The Red Queen. 
Wall-Flower. 

§ 3 (4 steps) 

Hawthorn. 

Toram. 

S. S. G. 

§ 4 (5 steps) 

A Stepney Coach. 

§ 5 (6 steps) 

Bay Laurel. 

Bradshaw of the Future. 

§ 6 (9 steps) 

Old King Cole. 

§7(14 steps) 

Theseus. 



A TANGLED TALE 


953 


ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS 

I have received several letters on the subjects of Knots 11 
and VI, which lead me to think some further explanation 
desirable. 

In Knot II, I had intended the numbering of the houses 
to begin at one corner of the Square, and this was as¬ 
sumed by most, if not all, of the competitors. Trojanus, 
however, says, "Assuming, in default of any information, 
that the street enters the square in the middle of each side, 
it may be supposed that the numbering begins at a street.” 
But surely the other is the more natural assumption? 

In Knot VI, the first Problem was, of course a mere jeu 
de mots, whose presence I thought excusable in a series of 
Problems whose aim is to entertain rather than to in¬ 
struct: but it has not escaped the contemptuous criticisms 
of two of my correspondents, who seem to think that 
Apollo is in duty bound to keep his bow always on the 
stretch. Neither of them has guessed it: and this is true 
human nature. Only the other day—the 31st of Septem¬ 
ber, to be quite exact—I met my old friend Brown, and 
gave him a riddle I had just heard. With one great effort 
of his colossal mind, Brown guessed it. "Right!” said I. 
"Ah,” said he, "it’s very neat—very neat. And it isn’t an 
answer that would occur to everybody. Very neat indeed.” 
A few yards farther on, I fell in with Smith, and to him 
I propounded the same riddle. He frowned over it for a 
minute, and then gave it up. Meekly I faltered out the 
answer. "A poor thing, sir!” Smith growled, as he turned 
away. “A very poor thing! I wonder you care to repeat 
such rubbish!” Yet Smith’s mind is, if possible, even more 
colossal than Brown’s. 

The second Problem of Knot VI is an example in or¬ 
dinary Double Rule of Three, whose essential feature is 
that the result depends on the variation of several ele¬ 
ments, which are so related to it that, if all but one be con¬ 
stant, it varies as that one: hence, if none be constant, it 
varies as their product. Thus, for example, the cubical 



STORIES 


954 

contents of a rectangular tank vary as its length, if 
breadth and depth be constant, and so on; hence, if none 
be constant, it varies as the product of the length, 
breadth, and depth. 

When the result is not thus connected with the varying 
elements, the problem ceases to be double Rule of Three 
and often becomes one of great complexity. 

To illustrate this, let us take two candidates for a prize, 
A and B, who are to compete in French, German, and 
Italian: 

(a) Let it be laid down that the result is to depend on 
their relative knowledge of each subject, so that, whether 
their marks, for French, be “i, 2” or ‘Too, 200”, the result 
will be the same: and let it also be laid down that, if they 
get equal marks on 2 papers, the final marks are to have 
the same ratio as those of the 3rd paper. This is a case of 
ordinary Double Rule of Three. We multiply A’s 3 marks 
together, and do the same for B. Note that, if A gets a 
single “zero”, his final mark is “zero”, even if he gets full 
marks for 2 papers while B gets only one mark for each 
paper. This of course would be very unfair on A , though 
a correct solution under the given conditions. 

(b) The result is to depend, as before, on relative 
knowledge; but French is to have twice as much weight as 
German or Italian. This is an unusual form of question. I 
should be inclined to say, “The resulting ratio is to be 
nearer to the French ratio than if we multiplied as in (a), 
and so much nearer that it would be necessary to use the 
other multipliers twice to produce the same result as in 
(a)”: e.g., if the French ratio were 9/10, and the others 
4/9, 1/9, so that the ultimate ratio, by method (a), would 
be 3/45,1 should multiply instead by 2/3, 1/3, giving the 
result, 1/5, which is nearer to 9/10 than if we had used 
method (a). 

(c) The result is to depend on actual amount of know¬ 
ledge of the 3 subjects collectively. Here we have to ask 
two questions: (1) What is to be the “unit” ( i.e . “stand¬ 
ard to measure by”) in each subject? (2) Are these units 



A TANGLED TALE 


955 

to be of equal, or unequal, value? The usual “unit” is the 
knowledge shown by answering the whole paper correct¬ 
ly; calling this “ioo”, all lower amounts are represented 
by numbers between "zero”, and “ioo”. Then, if these 
units are to be of equal value, we simply add . 4 ’s 3 marks 
together, and do the same for B. 

(d) The conditions are the same as (c), but French is 
to have double weight. Here we simply double the French 
marks, and add as before. 

(e) French is to have such weight that, if other marks 
be equal, the ultimate ratio is to be that of the French 
paper, so that a “zero” in this would swamp the candidate: 
but the other two subjects are only to affect the result col¬ 
lectively, by the amount of knowledge shown, the two 
being reckoned of equal value. Here I should add ^ 4 ’s 
German and Italian marks together, and multiply by his 
French mark. 

But I need not go on: the problem may evidently be 
set with many varying conditions, each requiring its own 
method of solution. The Problem in Knot VI was meant 
to belong to variety (a), and to make this clear, I in¬ 
serted the following passage: 

“Usually the competitors differ in one point only. Thus, 
last year, Fifi and Gogo made the same number of 
scarves in the trial week, and they were equally light; but 
Fifi's were twice as warm as Gogo’s, and she was pro¬ 
nounced twice as good.” 

What I have said will suffice, I hope, as an answer to 
Balbus, who holds that (a) and (c) are the only possible 
varieties of the problem, and that to say, “We cannot use 
addition, therefore we must be intended to use multipli¬ 
cation,” is "no more illogical than, from knowledge that 
one was not born in the night, to infer that he was born in 
the daytime”; and also to Fifee, who says, “I think a 
little more consideration will show you that our ‘error of 
adding the proportional numbers together for each candi¬ 
date instead of multiplying’ is no error at all.” Why, even 
if addition had been the right method to use, not one of the 



STORIES 


956 

writers (I speak from memory) showed any consciousness 
of the necessity of fixing a “unit” for each subject. “No 
error at all”! They were positively steeped in error! 

One correspondent (I do not name him, as the com¬ 
munication is not quite friendly in tone) writes thus: “I 
wish to add, very respectfully, that I think it would be in 
better taste if you were to abstain from the very trench¬ 
ant expressions which you are accustomed to indulge in 
when criticising the answer. That such a tone must not 
be” (“be not”?) “agreeable to the persons concerned who 
have made mistakes may possibly have no great weight 
with you, but I hope you will feel that it would be as well 
not to employ it, unless you are quite certain of being 
correct yourself.” The only instances the writer gives of 
the “trenchant expressions” are “hapless” and “malefac¬ 
tors”. I beg to assure him (and any others who may need 
the assurance: I trust there are none) that all such words 
have been used in jest, and with no idea that they could 
possibly annoy any one, and that I sincerely regret any 
annoyance I may have thus inadvertently given. May I 
hope that in future they will recognize the distinction 
between severe language used in sober earnest, and the 
“words of unmeant bitterness”, which Coleridge has 
alluded to in that lovely passage beginning, “A little child, 
a limber elf”? If the writer will refer to that passage, or to 
the Preface to Fire, Famine, and Slaughter, he will find 
the distinction, for which I plead, far better drawn out 
than I could hope to do in any words of mine. 

The writer’s insinuation that I care not how much an¬ 
noyance I give to my readers I think it best to pass over in 
silence; but to his concluding remark I must entirely de¬ 
mur. I hold that to use language likely to annoy any of 
my correspondents would not be in the least justified by 
the plea that I was “quite certain of being correct”. I 
trust that the knot-untiers and I are not on such terms as 
those! 

I beg to thank G. B. for the offer of a puzzle—which, 
however, is too like the old one, “Make four g’s into 100.” 



A TANGLED TALE 


957 


ANSWERS TO KNOT VIII 

§ i. The Pigs 

Problem .—Place twenty-four pigs in four sties so that, 
as you go round and round, you may always find the num¬ 
ber in each sty nearer to ten than the number in the last. 

Answer .—Place 8 pigs in the first sty, io in the second, 
nothing in the third, and 6 in the fourth: io is nearer ten 
than 8; nothing is nearer ten than io; 6 is nearer ten than 
nothing; and 8 is nearer ten than 6. 

This problem is noticed by only two correspondents. 
Balbus says, "It certainly cannot be solved mathematic¬ 
ally, nor do I see how to solve it by any verbal quibble.” 
Nolens Volens makes Her Radiancy change the direc¬ 
tion of going round; and even then is obliged to add, “the 
pig must be carried in front of her”! 

§ 2. The Grurmstipths 

Problem .—Omnibuses start from a certain point, both 
ways, every 15 minutes. A traveler, starting on foot along 
with one of them, meets one in i2| minutes: when will 
he be overtaken by one? 

Answer .—In 6 J minutes. 

Solution .—Let “a” be the distance an omnibus goes in 
15 minutes, and “x” the distance from the starting-point 
to where the traveler is overtaken. Since the omnibus 
met is due at the starting-point in 2\ minutes, it goes in 
that time as far as the traveler walks in 12^, i.e., it goes 5 
times as fast. Now the overtaking omnibus is " a” behind 
the traveler when he starts, and therefore goes “a+x” 

a 

while he goes “x”. Hence a +x=$x; i.e. 4x=a, and #=- 

4 

This distance would be traversed by an omnibus in 

-- minutes, and therefore by the traveler in 5 x—. 

4 4 



STORIES 


958 

Hence he is overtaken in i8f minutes after starting, i.e. 
in 6j minutes after meeting the omnibus. 

Four answers have been received, of which two are 
wrong. Dinah Mite rightly states that the overtaking 
omnibus reached the point where they met the other om¬ 
nibus 5 minutes after they left, but wrongly concludes 
that, going 5 times as fast, it would overtake them in an¬ 
other minute. The travelers are 5 minutes’ walk ahead of 
the omnibus, and must walk ^ of this distance farther 
before the omnibus overtakes them, which will be of 
the distance traversed by the omnibus in the same time: 
this will require i£ minutes more. Nolens Volens tries 
it by a process like "Achilles and the Tortoise". He rightly 
states that, when the overtaking omnibus leaves the gate, 
the travelers are ■§• of “a” ahead, and that it will take the 
omnibus 3 minutes to traverse this distance; "during 
which time” the travelers, he tells us, go jj of “a” (this 
should be yg-). The travelers being now yg- of “a” ahead, 
he concludes that the work remaining to be done is for the 
travelers to go yo °f while the omnibus goes yg\ The 
principle is correct, and might have been applied earlier. 

CLASS LIST 

1 

Balbus. Delta. 

ANSWERS TO KNOT IX 

§ i. The Buckets 

Problem .—Lardner states that a solid, immersed in a 
fluid, displaces an amount equal to itself in bulk. How 
can this be true of a small bucket floating in a larger 
one? 

Solution .—Lardner means, by "displaces”, "occupies a 
space which might be filled with water without any 
change in the surroundings.” If the portion of the floating 
bucket, which is above the water, could be annihilated, 



A TANGLED TALE 959 

and the rest of it transformed into water, the surrounding 
water would not change its position: wjiich agrees with 
Lardner’s statement. 

Five answers have been received, none of which ex¬ 
plains the difficulty arising from the well-known fact that 
a floating body is the same weight as the displaced fluid. 
Hecla says that “Only that portion of the smaller bucket 
which descends below the original level of the water can 
be properly said to be immersed, and only an equal bulk 
of water is displaced.” Hence, according to Hecla, a solid 
whose weight was equal to that of an equal bulk of water, 
would not float till the whole of it was below “the original 
level” of the water: but, as a matter of fact, it would float 
as soon as it was all under water. Magpie says the fallacy 
is “the assumption that one body can displace another 
from a place where it isn’t”, and that Lardner’s assertion 
is incorrect, except when the containing vessel “was ori¬ 
ginally full to the brim”. But the question of floating de¬ 
pends on the present state of things, not on past history. 
Old King Cole takes the same view as Hecla. Tym¬ 
panum and Vindex assume that “displaced” means “rais¬ 
ed above its original level”, and merely explain how it 
comes to pass that the water, so raised, is less in bulk than 
the immersed portion of bucket, and thus land themselves 
—or rather set themselves floating—in the same boat as 
Hecla. 

I regret that there is no Class List to publish for this 
Problem. 


§ 2. Balbus’s Essay 

Problem .—Balbus states that if a certain solid be im¬ 
mersed in a certain vessel of water, the water will rise 
through a series of distances, two inches, one inch, half an 
inch, etc., which series has no end. He concludes that the 
water will rise without limit. Is this true? 

Solution .—No. This series can never reach 4 inches, 
since, however many terms we take, we are always 



STORIES 


960 

short of 4 inches by an amount equal to the last term 
taken. 

Three answers have been received—but only two seem 
to me worthy of honours. 

Tympanum says that the statement about the stick "is 
merely a blind, to which the old answer may well be ap¬ 
plied, solvitur ambulando, or rather mergendo”. I trust 
Tympanum will not test this in his own person, by taking 
the place of the man in Balbus's Essay! He would infal¬ 
libly be drowned. 

Old King Cole rightly points out that the series, 2,1, 
etc., is a decreasing geometrical progression: while Vin- 
dex rightly identifies the fallacy as that of "Achilles and 
the Tortoise”. 


CLASS LIST 
I 

Old King Cole. Vindex. 


§ 3. The Garden 

Problem .—An oblong garden, half a yard longer than 
wide, consists entirely of a gravel walk, spirally arranged, 
a yard wide and 3630 yards long. Find the dimensions of 
the garden. 

Answer .— 60, 6o|. 

Solution .—The number of yards and fractions of a yard 
traversed in walking along a straight piece of walk, is 
evidently the same as the number of square yards and 
fractions of a square yard contained in that piece of walk: 
and the distance traversed in passing through a square 
yard at a comer, is evidently a yard. Hence the area of 
the garden is 3630 square yards: i.e. if x be the width, 
x(x+\) =3630. Solving fhis quadratic, we find x = 6 o. 
Hence the dimensions are 60,6o|. 



A TANGLED TALE 961 

Twelve answers have been received—seven right and 
five wrong. 

C. G. L., Nabob, Old Crow, and Tympanum assume 
that the number of yards in the length of the path is equal 
to the number of square yards in the garden. This is true, 
but should have been proved. But each is guilty of darker 
deeds. C. G. L.’s "working” consists of dividing 3630 by 
60. Whence came this divisor, 0 Segiel? Divination? Or 
was it a dream? I fear this solution is worth noting. Old 
Crow’s is shorter, and so (if possible) worth rather less. 
He says the answer "is at once seen to be 6ox6o|”! 
Nabob’s calculation is short, but "as rich as a Nabob” in 
error. He says that the square root of 3630, multiplied by 
2, equals the length plus the breadth. That is 60-25 x 2 
= 120J. His first assertion is only true of a square garden. 
His second is irrelevant, since 60-25 is n °t the square 
root of 3630! Nay, Bob, this will not do! Tympanum says 
that, by extracting the square root of 3630, we get 60 
yards with a remainder of 30/60, or half a yard, which we 
add so as to make the oblong 60 x 6o|. This is very ter¬ 
rible: but worse remains behind. Tympanum proceeds 
thus: "But why should there be the half-yard at all? Be¬ 
cause without it there would be no space at all for flowers. 
By means of it, we find reserved in the very centre a small 
plot of ground, two yards long by half a yard wide, the 
only space not occupied by walk.” But Balbus expressly 
said that the walk "used up the whole of the area”, 0 
Tympanum! My tympa is exhausted: my brain is num! I 
can say no more. 

Hecla indulges, again and again, in that most fatal 
of all habits in computation—the making two mistakes 
which cancel each other. She takes x as the width of the 
garden, in yards, and x + \ as its length, and makes her 
first "coil” the sum of x-\, x-\, x-i, x-i, i.e. 
4% -3: but the fourth term should be x -1|, so that her 
first coil is | a yard too long. Her second coil is the sum 
of x-2\, x-2\, x~3, x-y here the first term should 
be x-2 and the last x -3|: these two mistakes cancel 



STORIES 


962 

and this coil is therefore right. And the same thing is 
true of every other coil but the last, which needs an extra 
half-yard to reach the end of the path: and this exactly 
balances the mistake in the first coil. Thus the sum- 
total of the coils comes right though the working is all 
wrong. 

Of the seven who are right, Dinah Mite, Janet, Mag¬ 
pie, and Taffy make the same assumption as C. G. L. and 
Co. They then solve by a quadratic. Magpie also tries it 
by arithmetical progression, but fails to notice that the 
first and last “coils” have special values. 

Alumnus Etona£ attempts to prove what C. G. L. as¬ 
sumes by a particular instance, taking a garden 6 by 5§. 
He ought to have proved it generally: what is true of one 
number is not always true of others. Old King Cole 
solves it by an arithmetical progression. It is right, but 
too lengthy to be worth as much as a quadratic. 

Vindex proves it very neatly, by pointing out that a 
yard of walk measured along the middle represents a 
square yard of garden, “whether we consider the straight 
stretches of walk or the square yards at the angles, in 
which the middle line goes half a yard in one direction 
and then turns a right angle and goes half a yard in an¬ 
other direction.” 


CLASS LIST 

1 

Vindex. 


11 

Alumnus Etonje. 


Old King Cole. 


Dinah Mite. 
Janet. 


hi 


Magpie. 

Taffy. 



A TANGLED TALE 


963 


ANSWERS TO KNOT X 

§ i. The Chelsea Pensioners 

Problem .—If 70 per cent have lost an eye, 75 per cent 
an ear, 80 per cent an arm, 85 per cent a leg: what per¬ 
centage, at least, must have lost all four? 

Answer. —Ten. 

Solution .— (I adopt that of Polar Star, as being better 
than my own.) Adding the wounds together, we get 
7° + 75 + 80 + 85 =310, among 100 men; which gives 3 
to each, and 4 to 10 men. Therefore the least percentage 
is 10. 

Nineteen answers have been received. One is “5”, but, 
as no working is given with it, it must, in accordance with 
the rule, remain “a deed without a name”. Janet makes 
it ‘'35 tV'. I am sorry she has misunderstood the ques¬ 
tion, and has supposed that those who had lost an ear 
were 75 per cent of those who had lost an eye\ and so on. Of 
course, on this supposition, the percentages must all be 
multiplied together. This she has done correctly, but I 
can give her no honours, as I do not think the question 
will fairly bear her interpretation. Three Score and Ten 
makes it '‘19!”. Her solution has given me—I will not 
say “many anxious days and sleepless nights”, for I wish 
to be strictly truthful, but—some trouble in making any 
sense at all of it. She makes the number of “pensioners 
wounded once” to be 310 (“per cent,” I suppose!): divid¬ 
ing by 4, she gets 77I as “average percentage”: again di¬ 
viding by 4, she gets 19! as “percentage wounded four 
times”. Does she suppose wounds of different kinds to 
“absorb” each other, so to speak? Then, no doubt, the 
data are equivalent to 77 pensioners with one wound each 
and a half-pensioner with a half-wound. And does she 
then suppose these concentrated wounds to be transfer¬ 
able, so that | of these unfortunates can obtain perfect 



STORIES 


964 

health by handing over their wounds to the remaining J? 
Granting these suppositions, her answer is right; or rather 
if the question had been, “A road is covered with one inch 
of gravel, along 77! per cent of it. How much of it could 
be covered 4 inches deep with the same material?” her 
answer would have been right. But alas, that wasn’t the 
question! Delta makes some most amazing assumptions: 
“let every one who has not lost an eye have lost an ear,” 
“let every one who has not lost both eyes and ears have 
lost an arm.” Her ideas of a battlefield are grim indeed. 
Fancy a warrior who would continue fighting after losing 
both eyes, both ears, and both arms! This is a case which 
she (or "it”?) evidently considers possible. 

Next come eight writers who have made the unwar¬ 
rantable assumption that, because 70 per cent have lost 
an eye, therefore 30 per cent have not lost one, so that they 
have both eyes. This is illogical. If you give me a bag con¬ 
taining 100 sovereigns, and if in an hour I come to you 
(my face not beaming with gratitude nearly so much as 
when I received the bag) to say, “I am sorry to tell you 
that 70 of these sovereigns are bad,” do I thereby guaran¬ 
tee the other 30 to be good? Perhaps I have not tested 
them yet. The sides of this illogical octagon are as follows, 
in alphabetical order: Algernon Bray, Dinah Mite, 
G. S. C., Jane E., J. D. W., Magpie (who makes the de¬ 
lightful remark, “Therefore 90 per cent have two of some¬ 
thing,” recalling to one’s memory that fortunate monarch 
with whom Xerxes was so much pleased that “he gave 
him ten of everything”!), S. S. G., and Tokio. 

Bradshaw of the Future and T. R. do the question 
in a piecemeal fashion—on the principle that the 70 per 
cent and the 75 per cent, though commenced at opposite 
ends of the 100, must overlap by at least 45 per cent; and 
so on. This is quite correct working, but not, I think, 
quite the best way of doing it. 

The other five competitors will, I hope, feel themselves 
sufficiently glorified by being placed in the first class, 
without my composing a Triumphal Ode for each! 



A TANGLED TALE 


965 


Old Cat. 
Old Hen. 


CLASS LIST 
I 


White Sugar. 


Polar Star. 
Simple Susan. 


11 

Bradshaw of the Future. T. R. 


iii 


Algernon Bray. J. D. W. 

Dinah Mite. Magpie. 

G. S. C. S. S. G. 

Jane E. Tokio. 


§ 2. Change of Day 

I must postpone, sine die, the geographical problem— 
partly because I have not yet received the statistics I am 
hoping for, and partly because I am myself so entirely 
puzzled by it; and when an examiner is himself dimly 
hovering between a second class and a third, how is he to 
decide the position of others? 

§ 3. The Son’s Ages 

Problem .—At first, two of the ages are together equal 
to the third. A few years afterwards, two of them are to¬ 
gether double of the third. When the number of years 
since the first occasion is two-thirds of the sum of the ages 
on that occasion, dne age is 21. What are the other two? 

Answer .—15 and i8„. 

Solution .—Let the ages at first be x, y, (x+y). Now, 
if a + b = 2c, then (a - n) + (b - n) = 2 (c - n ), whatever be 
the value of n. Hence the second relationship, if ever true, 



STORIES 


966 

was always true. Hence it was true at first. But it cannot 
be true that x ani y are together double of (x +y). Hence 
it must be true of(x+y), together with x or y; and it does 
not matter which we take. We assume, then, {x+y) +x 
= 2y; i.e. y — 2x. Htnce the three ages were, at first, x, 2X, 
3x; and the numbei of years since that time is two-thirds 
of 6x, i.e. is 4X. Hence the present ages are 5%, 6x, 'jx. The 
ages are clearly integers, since this is only “the year when 
one of my sons come, of age”. Hence 7^ = 21, # = 3, and 
the other ages are 15,18. 

Eighteen answers ha\e been received. One of the writers 
merely asserts that the first occasion was 12 years ago, 
that the ages were then 0, 6, and 3; and that on the second 
occasion they were 14, 21, and 8! As a Roman father, I 
ought to withhold the name of the rash writer; but respect 
for age makes me break the rule: it is Three Score and 
Ten. Jane E. also asserts that the ages at first were 9, 
6, 3: then she calculates the present ages, leaving the 
second occasion unnoticed. Old Hen is nearly as bad; she 
“tried various numbers till I found one that fitted all the 
conditions”; but merely scratching up the earth, and peck¬ 
ing about, is not the way to solve a problem, O venerable 
bird! And close after Old Hen prowls, with hungry eyes, 
Old Cat, who calmly assumes, to begin with, that the son 
who comes of age is the eldest. Eat your bird, Puss, for you 
will get nothing from me! 

There are yet two zeroes to dispose of. Minerva as¬ 
sumes that, on every occasion, a son comes of age; and 
that it is only such a son who is “tipped with gold”. Is it 
wise thus to interpret, “Now, my boys, calculate your 
ages, and you shall have the money”? Bradshaw of the 
Future says “let” the ages at first be 9, 6, 3, then as¬ 
sumes that the second occasion was 6 years afterwards, 
and on these baseless assumptions brings out the right 
answers. Guide future travelers, an thou wilt; thou art no 
Bradshaw for this Age! 

Of those who win honours, the merely "honourable” 



A TANGLED TALE 967 

are two. Dinah Mite ascertains (rightly) the relationship 
between the three ages at first, but then assumes one of 
them to be “6”, thus making the rest of her solution ten¬ 
tative. M. F. C. does the algebra all right up to the conclu¬ 
sion that the present ages are 5 z, 6 z, and 72; it then as¬ 
sumes, without giving any reason, that yz = 21. 

Of the more honourable. Delta attempts a novelty— 
to discover which son comes of age by elimination: it as¬ 
sumes, successively, that it is the middle one, and that it 
is the youngest; and in each case it apparently brings out 
an absurdity. Still, as the proof contains the following bit 
of algebra: “63 =yx + 4/y; 21 =# + 4/7 of y” I trust it 

will admit that its proof is not quite conclusive. The rest 
of its work is good. Magpie betrays the deplorable tend¬ 
ency of her tribe—to appropriate any stray conclusion 
she comes across, without having any strict logical right 
to it. Assuming A, B,C, as the ages at first, and E as the 
number of the years that have elapsed since then, she 
finds (rightly) the 3 equations, 2 A =B, C =B +A, D —2B. 
She then says, “Supposing that A =1, then B = 2, C =3, 
and D = 4. Therefore for A, B, C, D, four numbers are 
wanted which shall be to each other as i:2:3:4.” It is in 
the “therefore” that I detect the unconscientiousness of 
this bird. The conclusion is true, but this is only because 
the equations are “homogeneous” ( i.e . having one “un¬ 
known” in each term), a fact which I strongly suspect had 
not been grasped—I beg pardon, clawed—by her. Were 
I to lay this little pitfall: “A + 1 =B, B + 1 = C; supposing 
A = 1, then B = 2, and C =3. Therefore for A, B, C, three 
numbers are wanted which shall be to one another as 
1:2:3,” would you not flutter down into it, O Magpie! as 
amiably as a Dove? Simple Susan is anything but simple 
to me. After ascertaining that the 3 ages at first are as 
3:2:1, she says, “Then, as two-thirds of their sum, added 
to one of them, =21, the sum cannot exceed 30, and con¬ 
sequently the highest cannot exceed 15.” I suppose her 
(mental) argument is something like this: “Two-thirds of 
sum, +one age, =21; sum, +3 halves of one age, 



STORIES 


968 

= 31^. But 3 halves of one age cannot be less than i| 
[here I perceive that Simple Susan would on no account 
present a guinea to a newborn baby!]; hence the sum 
cannot exceed 30.” This is ingenious, but her proof, after 
that, is (as she candidly admits) “clumsy and round¬ 
about”. She finds that there are 5 possible sets of ages, 
and eliminates four of them. Suppose that, instead of 5, 
there had been 5 million possible sets! Would Simple 
Susan have courageously ordered in the necessary gallon 
of ink and ream of paper? 

The solution sent in by C. R. is, like that of Simple 
Susan, partly tentative, and so does not rise higher than 
being Clumsily Right. 

Among those who have earned the highest honours, 
Algernon Bray solves the problem quite correctly, but 
adds that there is nothing to exclude the supposition that 
all the ages were fractional. This would make the number 
of answers infinite. Let me meekly protest that I never in¬ 
tended my readers to devote the rest of their lives to 
writing out answers! E. M. Rix points out that, if frac¬ 
tional ages be admissible, any one of the three sons might 
be the one “come of age”; but she rightly rejects this 
supposition on the ground that it would make the pro¬ 
blem indeterminate. White Sugar is the only one who 
has detected an oversight of mine: I had forgotten the 
possibility (which of course ought to be allowed for) that 
the son who came of age that year, need not have done so 
by that day, so that he might be only 20. This gives a 
second solution, viz., 20, 24, 28. Well said, pure Crystal! 
Verily, thy “fair discourse hath been as sugar”! 

CLASS LIST 

1 

Algernon Bray. S. S. G. 

An Old Fogey: Tokio. 

E. M. Rix. T. R. 

G. S. C. White Sugar. 



A TANGLED TALE 


969 


II 

C. R. Magpie. 

Delta. Simple Susan. 

hi 

Dinah Mite. M. F. C. 

I have received more than one remonstrance on my 
assertion, in the Chelsea Pensioners' problem, that it was 
illogical to assume, from the datum, “70 per cent have 
lost an eye,” that 30 per cent have not. Algernon Bray 
states, as a paralel case, "Suppose Tommy’s father gives 
him 4 apples, and he eats one of them, how many has he 
left?” and says, "I think we are justified in answering, 3.” 
I think so too. There is no "must” here, and data are 
evidently meant to fix the answer exactly, but, if the 
question were set me, "How many must he have left?” 
I should understand the data to be that his father gave 
him 4 at least, but may have given him more. 

I take this opportunity of thanking those who have 
sent, along with their answers to the Tenth Knot, regrets 
that there are no more Knots to come, or petitions that 
I should recall my resolution to bring them to an end. I 
am most grateful for their kind words; but I think it 
wisest to end what, at best, was but a lame attempt. “The 
stretched metre of an antique song” is beyond my com¬ 
pass; and my puppets were neither distinctly in my life 
(like those I now address), nor yet (like Alice and the 
Mock Turtle) distinctly out of it. Yet let me at least fancy, 
as I lay down the pen, that I carry with me into my silent 
life, dear reader, a farewell smile from your unseen face, 
and a kindly farewell pressure from your unfelt hand! 
And so, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow, that I 
shall say "good night!” till it be morrow. 



NOVELTY AND ROMANCEMENT 


I had grave doubts at first whether to call this passage of 
my life “A Wail”, or “A Paean”, so much does it contain 
that is great and glorious, so much that is sombre and 
stern. Seeking for something which should be a sort of 
medium between the two, I decided, at last, on the above 
heading—wrongly, of course; I am always wrong: but let 
me be calm. It is a characteristic of the true orator never 
to yield to a burst of passion at the outset; the mildest of 
commonplaces are all he dare indulge in at first, and 
thence he mounts gradually ;—“vires acquirit eundo” 
Suffice it, then, to say, in the first place, that I am Leopold 
Edgar Stubbs. I state this fact distinctly in commencing, 
to prevent all chance of the reader’s confounding me 
either with the eminent shoemaker of that name, of 
Pottle-street, Camberwell, or with my less reputable, but 
more widely known, namesake, Stubbs, the light come¬ 
dian, of the Provinces; both which connections I repel 
with horror and disdain: no offence, however, being in¬ 
tended to either of the individuals named—men whom I 
have never seen, whom I hope I never shall. 

So much for commonplaces. 

Tell me now, oh! man, wise in interpretation of dreams 
and omens, how it chanced that, on a Friday afternoon, 
turning suddenly out of Great Wattles-street, I should 
come into sudden and disagreeable collision with an 
humble individual of unprepossessing exterior, but with 
an eye that glowed with all the fire of genius? I had 
dreamed at night that the great idea of my life was to be 
fulfilled. What was the great idea of my life? I will tell 
you. With shame or sorrow I will tell you. 

My thirst and passion from boyhood (predominating 
over the love of taws and running neck and neck with my 
appetite for toffee) has been for poetry—for poetry in its 
widest and wildest sense—for poetry untrammeled by the 

970 



NOVELTY AND ROMANCEMENT 971 

laws of sense, rhyme, or rhythm, soaring through the uni¬ 
verse, and echoing the music of the spheres! From my 
youth, nay, from my very cradle, I have yearned for 
poetry, for beauty, for novelty, for romancement. When I 
say ‘ ‘yearned’ ’, I employ a word mildly expressive of what 
may be considered as an outline of my feelings in my 
calmer moments: it is about as capable of picturing the 
headlong impetuosity of my life-long enthusiasm as those 
unanatomical paintings which adorn the outside of the 
Adelphi, representing Flexmore in one of the many con¬ 
ceivable attitudes into which the human frame has never 
yet been reduced, are of conveying to the speculative pit- 
goer a true idea of the feats performed by that extra¬ 
ordinary compound of humanity and Indian-rubber. 

I have wandered from the point: that is a peculiarity, 
if I may be permitted to say so, incidental to life; and, 
as I remarked on an occasion which time will not suffer 
me more fully to specify, “What, after all, is life?” nor 
did I find any one of the individuals present (we were 
a party of nine, including the waiter, and it was while 
the soup was being removed that the above-recorded 
observation was made) capable of furnishing me with a 
rational answer to the question. 

The verses which I wrote at an early period of life 
were eminently distinguished by a perfect freedom from 
conventionalism, and were thus unsuited to the present 
exactions of literature: in a future age they will be read 
and admired, “when Milton,” as my venerable uncle has 
frequently exclaimed, “when Milton and such like are 
forgot!” Had it not been for this sympathetic relative, 
I firmly believe that the poetry of my nature would never 
have come out; I can still recall the feelings which thrilled 
me when he offered me sixpence for a rhyme to “despot¬ 
ism”. I never succeeded, it is true, in finding the rhyme, 
but it was on the very next Wednesday that I penned my 
well known “Sonnet on a Dead Kitten”, and in the course 
of a fortnight had commenced three epics, the titles of 
which I have unfortunately now forgotten. 



STORIES 


972 

Seven volumes of poetry have I given to an ungrateful 
world during my life; they have all shared the fate of true 
genius—obscurity and contempt. Not that any fault 
could be found with their contents; whatever their defi¬ 
ciencies may have been, no reviewer has yet dared to 
criticize them. This is a great fact. 

The only composition of mine which has yet made any 
noise in the world, was a sonnet I addressed to one of the 
Corporation of Muggleton-cum-Swillside, on the occasion 
of his being selected Mayor of that town. It was largely 
circulated through private hands, and much talked of at 
the time; and though the subject of it, with characteristic 
vulgarity of mind, failed to appreciate the delicate com¬ 
pliments it involved, and indeed spoke of it rather disre¬ 
spectfully than otherwise, I am inclined to think that it 
possesses all the elements of greatness. The concluding 
couplet was added at the suggestion of a friend, who 
assured me it was necessary to complete the sense, and in 
this point I deferred to his maturer judgment: 

"When Desolation snatched her tearful prey 
From the lorn empire of despairing day; 

When all the light, by gemless fancy thrown. 

Served but to animate the putrid stone; 

When monarchs, lessening on the wildered sight, 
Crumblingly vanished into utter night; 

When murder stalked with thirstier strides abroad. 

And redly flashed the never-sated sword; 

In such an hour thy greatness had been seen— 

That is, if such an hour had ever been— 

In such an hour thy praises shall be sung. 

If not by mine, by many a worthier tongue; 

And thou be gazed upon by wondering men. 

When such an hour arrives, but not till then!” 

Alfred Tennyson is Poet Laureate, and it is not for me 
to dispute his claim to that eminent position; still I can¬ 
not help thinking, that if the Government had only come 
forward candidly at the time, and thrown the thing open 
to general competition, proposing some subject to test 



NOVELTY AND ROMANCEMENT 973 

the powers of the candidate (say “Frampton’s Pill of 
Health, an Acrostic”), a very different result might have 
been arrived at. 

But let us return to our muttons (as our noble allies 
do most unromantically express themselves), and to the 
mechanic of Great Wattles-street. He was coming out of 
a small shop—rudely built it was, dilapidated exceed¬ 
ingly, and in its general appearance seedy—what did I 
see in all this to inspire a belief that a great epoch in my 
existence arrived? Reader, I saw the signboard! 

Yes. Upon that rusty signboard, creaking awkwardly 
on its one hinge against the mouldering wall, was an in¬ 
scription which thrilled me from head to foot with un¬ 
wonted excitement. ‘‘Simon Lubkin. Dealer in Romance- 
ment.” Those were the very words. 

It was Friday, the fourth of June, half-past four p.m. 

Three times I read that inscription through, and then 
took out my pocketbook, and copied it on the spot; the 
mechanic regarding me during the whole proceeding with 
a stare of serious and (as I thought at the time) respectful 
astonishment. 

I stopped that mechanic, and entered into conversation 
with him; years of agony since then have gradually 
branded that scene upon my writhing heart, and I can 
repeat all that passed, word for word. 

Did the mechanic (this was my first question) possess 
a kindred soul, or did he not? 

Mechanic didn’t know as he did. 

Was he avyare (this with thrilling emphasis) of the 
meaning of that glorious inscription upon his sign¬ 
board? 

Bless you, mechanic knew all about that ’ere. 

Would mechanic (overlooking the suddenness of the 
invitation) object to adjourn to the neighbouring public- 
house, and there discuss the point more at leisure? 

Mechanic would not object to a drain. On the contrary. 

(Adjournment accordingly: brandy-and-water for two: 
conversation resumed.) 



STORIES 


974 

Did the article sell well, especially with the “mobile 
vulgus ”? 

Mechanic cast a look of good-natured pity on the ques¬ 
tioner; the article sold well, he said, and the vulgars 
bought it most. 

Why not add “Novelty" to the inscription? (This was a 
critical moment: I trembled as I asked the question.) 

Not so bad an idea, mechanic thought: time was, it 
might have answered; but time flies, you see. 

Was mechanic alone in his glory, or was there any one 
else who dealt as largely in the article? 

Mechanic would pound it, there was none. 

What was the article employed for? (I brought this 
question out with a gasp, excitement almost choking my 
utterance.) 

It would piece almost anything together, mechanic 
believed, and make it solider nor stone. 

This was a sentence difficult of interpretation. I thought 
it over a little, and then said, doubtfully, “you mean, I 
presume, that it serves to connect the broken threads of 
human destiny? to invest with a—with a sort of vital 
reality the chimerical products of a fertile imagination?" 

Mechanic’s answer was short, and anything but en¬ 
couraging: “mought be—, I’sno scollard, bless you.” 

At this point conversation certainly began to flag; I was 
seriously debating in my own mind whether this could 
really be the fulfilment of my life-cherished dream; so ill 
did the scene harmonize with my ideas of romance, and 
so painfully did I feel my companion’s lack of sympathy 
in the enthusiasm of my nature—an enthusiasm which 
has found vent, ere now, in actions which the thoughtless 
crowd have too often attributed to mere eccentricity. 

I have risen with the lark—“day’s sweet harbinger”— 
(once, certainly, if not oftener), with the aid of a patent 
alarm, and have gone forth at that unseemly hour, much 
to the astonishment of the housemaid cleaning the door 
steps, to “brush with hasty steps the dewy lawn”, and 
have witnessed the golden dawn with eyes yet half-closed 



NOVELTY AND ROMANCEMENT 975 

in sleep. (I have always stated to my friends, in any 
allusion to the subject, that my raptures at that moment 
were such that I have never since ventured to expose 
myself to the influence of excitement so dangerous. In 
confidence, however, I admit that the reality did not 
come up to the idea I had formed of it over night, and 
by no means repaid the struggle of getting out of bed so 
early.) 

I have wandered in the solemn woods at night, and 
bent me o'er the moss-grown fountain, to lave in its 
crystal stream my tangled locks and fevered brow. (What 
though I was laid up with a severe cold in consequence, 
and that my hair was out of curl for a week? Do paltry 
considerations such as these, I ask, affect the poetry of 
the incident?) 

I have thrown open my small, but neatly furnished, 
cottage tenement, in the neighbourhood of St. John's 
Wood, and invited an aged beggar in to “sit by my fire, 
and talk the night away”. (It was immediately after read¬ 
ing Goldsmith's “Deserted Village”. True it is that he 
told me nothing interesting, and that he took the hall- 
clock with him when he departed in the morning; still my 
uncle has always said that he wishes he had been there, 
and that it displayed in me a freshness and greenness of 
fancy (or “disposition”, I forget which) such as he had 
never expected to see.) 

I feel that it is incumbent on me to enter more fully 
into this latter topic—the personal history of my uncle: 
the world will one day learn to revere the talents of that 
wonderful man, though a want of funds prevents, at 
present, the publication of the great system of philosophy 
of which he is the inventor. Meanwhile, out of the mass 
of priceless manuscripts which he has bequeathed to an 
ungrateful nation, I will venture to select one striking 
specimen. And when the day arrives that my poetry is 
appreciated by the world at large (distant though it now 
appear!) then, I feel assured, shall his genius also receive 
its meed of fame! 



STORIES 


976 

Among the papers of that respected relative, I find 
what appears to have been a leaf torn from some philo¬ 
sophical work of the day: the following passage is scored. 
“Is this your rose? It is mine. It is yours. Are these your 
houses? They are mine. Give to me (of) the bread. She 
gave him a box on the ear." Against this occurs a mar¬ 
ginal note in my uncle’s handwriting: “some call this 
unconnected writing: I have my own opinion.” This last 
was a favourite expression of his, veiling a profundity of 
ethical acumen on which it would be vain to speculate; 
indeed, so uniformly simple was the language of this great 
man, that no one besides myself ever suspected his 
possessing more than the ordinary share of human 
intellect. 

May I, however, venture to express what I believe 
would have been my uncle’s interpretation of this remark¬ 
able passage?- It appears that the writer intended to 
distinguish the provinces of Poetry, Real Property, and 
Personal Property. The inquirer touches first on flowers, 
and with what a gush of generous feeling does the answer 
break upon him! “It is mine. It is yours.” That is the 
beautiful, the true, the good; these are not hampered by 
petty consideration of “meum” and “tuum”; these are 
the common property of men. (It was with some such 
idea as this that I drew up the once celebrated bill, en¬ 
titled “An Act for exempting Pheasants from the opera¬ 
tion of the Game Laws, on the ground of Beauty”—a 
bill which would, doubtless, have passed both Houses in 
triumph, but that the member who had undertaken the 
care of it was unfortunately incarcerated in a Lunatic 
Asylum before it had reached the second reading.) En¬ 
couraged by the success of his first question, our inquirer 
passes on to “houses” (“Real Property”, you will ob¬ 
serve); he’ is here met by the stern, chilling answer, “They 
are mine”—none of the liberal sentiment which dictated 
the former reply, but in its place a dignified assertion of 
the rights of property. 

Had this been a genuine Socratic dialogue, and not 



NOVELTY AND ROMANCEMENT 977 

merely a modern imitation, the inquirer would have 
probably here interrupted with “To me indeed/’ or, “I, 
for my part,” or, “But how otherwise?” or some other of 
those singular expressions, with which Plato makes his 
characters display at once their blind acquiescence in 
their instructor’s opinions, and their utter inability to 
express themselves grammatically. But the writer takes 
another line of thought; the bold inquirer, undeterred by 
the coldness of the last reply, proceeds from questions to 
demands, “give me (of) the bread”; and here the conver¬ 
sation abruptly ceases, but the moral of the whole is 
pointed in the narrative: “she gave him a box on the ear.” 
This is not the philosophy of one individual or nation, the 
sentiment is, if I may so say, European; and I am borne 
out in this theory by the fact that the book has evidently 
been printed in three parallel columns, English, French, 
and German. 

Such a man was my uncle; and with such a man did I 
resolve to confront the suspected mechanic. I appointed 
the following morning for an interview, when I would 
personally inspect "the article” (I could not bring myself 
to utter the beloved word itself). I passed a restless and 
feverish night, crushed by a sense of the approaching 
crisis. 

The hour came at last—the hour of misery and despair; 
it always does so, it cannot be put off forever; even on 
a visit to a dentist, as my childhood can attest with bitter 
experience, we are not forever getting there; the fatal 
door too surely dawns upon us, and our heart, which for 
the last half-hour has been gradually sinking lower and 
lower, until we almost doubt its existence, vanishes sud¬ 
denly downwards into depths hitherto undreamed of. 
And so, I repeat it, the hour came at last. 

Standing before that base mechanic's door, with a 
throbbing and expectant heart, my eye chanced to fall 
once more upon that signboard, once more I perused its 
strange inscription. Oh! fatal change! Oh! horror! What 
do I see? Have I been deluded by a heated imagination? 

21 L.C. 



STORIES 


978 

A hideous gap yawns between the N and the C, making 
it not one word but two! 

And the dream was over. 

At the corner of the street I turned to take a sad fond 
look at the spectre of a phantom hope, I once had held 
so dear. “Adieu!” I whispered; this was all the last fare¬ 
well I took, and I leant upon my walking stick and wiped 
away a tear. On the following day I entered into com¬ 
mercial relations with the firm of Dumpy and Spagg, 
wholesale dealers in the wine and spirit department. 

The signboard yet creaks upon the mouldering wall, 
but its sound shall make music in these ears nevermore— 
ah! nevermore. 



A PHOTOGRAPHER’S DAY OUT 


I am shaken, and sore, and stiff, and bruised. As I have 
told you many times already, I haven’t the least idea how 
it happened and there is no use in plaguing me with any 
more questions about it. Of course, if you wish it, I can 
read you an extract from my diary, giving a full account 
of the events of yesterday, but if you expect to find any 
clue to the mystery in that, I fear you are doomed to be 
disappointed. 

August 23, Tuesday. They say that we Photographers 
are a blind race at best; that we learn to look at even the 
prettiest faces as so much light and shade; that we seldom 
admire, and never love. This is a delusion I long to break 
through—if I could only find a young lady to photograph, 
realizing my ideal of beauty—above all, if her name 
should be—(why is it, I wonder, that I dote on the name 
Amelia more than any other word in the English lan¬ 
guage?)—I feel sure that I could shake off this cold, 
philosophic lethargy. 

The time has come at last. Only this evening I fell in 
with young Harry Glover in the Haymarket—“Tubbs!” 
he shouted, slapping me familiarly on the back, “my 
Uncle wants you down to-morrow at his Villa, camera 
and all!” 

“But I don’t know your uncle,” I replied, with my 
characteristic caution. (N.B. If I have a virtue, it is quiet, 
gentlemanly caution.) 

“Never mind, old boy, he knows all about you. You be 
off by the early train, and take your whole kit of bottles, 
for you’ll find lots of faces to uglify, and-” 

“Ca'n’t go,” I said rather gruffly, for the extent of the 
job alarmed me, and I wished to cut him short, having 
a decided objection to talking slang in the public streets. 

“Well, they’ll be precious cut up about it, that’s all,” 

979 


STORIES 


980 

said Harry, with rather a blank face, "and my cousin 
Amelia-” 

"Don’t say another word!" I cried enthusiastically, “I’ll 
go!” And as my omnibus came by at the moment, I 
jumped in and rattled off before he had recovered his 
astonishment at my change of manner. So it is settled, 
and to-morrow I am to see an Amelia, and—Oh Destiny, 
what hast thou in store for me? 

August 24, Wednesday. A glorious morning. Packed in 
a great hurry, luckily breaking only two bottles and three 
glasses in doing so. Arrived at Rosemary Villa as the 
party were sitting down to breakfast. Father, mother, 
two sons from school, a host of children from the nursery 
and the inevitable BABY. 

But how shall I describe the daughter? Words are 
powerless; nothing but a Tablotype could do it. Her nose 
was in beautiful perspective—her mouth wanting per¬ 
haps the least possible foreshortening—but the exquisite 
half-tints on the cheek would have blinded one to any 
defects, and as to the high light on her chin, it was 
(photographically speaking) perfection. Oh! what a pic¬ 
ture she would have made if fate had not—but I am 
anticipating. 

There was a Captain Flanaghan present- 

I am aware that the preceding paragraph is slightly 
abrupt, but when I reached that point, I remembered 
that the idiot actually believed himself engaged to Amelia 
{my Amelia!). I choked, and could get no further. His 
figure, I am willing to admit, was good: some might 
have admired his face; but what is face or figure without 
brains? 

My own figure is perhaps a little inclined to the robust; 
in stature I am none of your military giraffes—but why 
should I describe myself? My photograph (done by my¬ 
self) will be sufficient evidence to the world. 

The breakfast, no doubt, was good, but I knew not 
what I ate or drank; I lived for Amelia only, and as I 
gazed on that peerless brow, those chiseled features, I 



a photographer’s day out 981 

clenched my fist in an involuntary transport (upsetting 
my coffee-cup in doing so), and mentally exclaimed, “I 
will photograph that woman, or perish in the attempt!” 

After breakfast the work of the day commenced, which 
I will here briefly record. 

Picture i. —Paterfamilias. This I wanted to try again, 
but they all declared it would do very well, and had “just 
his usual expression”; though unless his usual expression 
was that of a man with a bone in his throat, endeavouring 
to alleviate the agony of choking by watching the end of 
his nose with both eyes, I must admit that this was too 
favourable a statement of the case. 

Picture 2.—Materfamilias. She told us with a simper, 
as she sat down, that she “had been very fond of theatri¬ 
cals in her youth”, and that she “wished to be taken in a 
favourite Shakespearean character”. What the character 
was, after long and anxious thought on the subject, I 
have given up as a hopeless mystery, not knowing any 
one of his heroines in whom an attitude of such spas¬ 
modic energy could have been combined with a face of 
such blank indifference, or who could have been thought 
appropriately costumed in a blue silk gown, with a High¬ 
land scarf over one shoulder, a ruffle of Queen Elizabeth’s 
time round the throat, and a hunting-whip. 

* 

Picture 3.—17th sitting. Placed the baby in profile. 
After waiting till the usual kicking had subsided, un¬ 
covered the lens. The little wretch instantly threw its 
head back, luckily only an inch, as it was stopped by the 
nurse’s nose, establishing the infant’s claim to “first 
blood” (to use a sporting phrase). This, of course, gave 
two eyes to the result, something that might be called a 
nose, and an unnaturally wide mouth. Called it a full-face 
accordingly and went on to 

Picture 4.—The three younger girls, as they would 
have appeared, if by any possibility a black dose could 
have been administered to each of them at the same 



STORIES 


982 

moment, and the three tied together by the hair before 
the expression produced by the medicine had subsided 
from any of their faces. Of course, I kept this view of the 
subject to myself, and merely said that "it reminded me 
of a picture of the three Graces”, but the sentence ended 
in an involuntary groan, which I had the greatest diffi¬ 
culty in converting into a cough. 

Picture 5. —This was to have been the great artistic 
triumph of the day; a family group, designed by the two 
parents, and combining the domestic with the allegorical. 
It was intended to represent the baby being crowned with 
flowers, by the united efforts of the children, regulated 
by the advice of the father, under the personal superin¬ 
tendence of the mother; and to combine with this the 
secondary meaning of "Victory transferring her laurel 
crown to Innocence, with Resolution, Independence, 
Faith, Hope and Charity, assisting in the graceful task, 
while Wisdom looks benignly on, and smiles approval!” 
Such, I say, was the intention ; the result, to any unpre¬ 
judiced observer, was capable of but one interpretation— 
that the baby was in a fit—that the mother (doubtless 
under some erroneous notions of the principles of Human 
Anatomy), was endeavouring to recover it by bringing 
the crown of its head in contact with its chest—that the 
two boys, seeing no prospect for the infant but immediate 
destruction, were tearing out some locks of its hair as 
mementos of the fatal event—that two of the girls were 
waiting for a chance at the baby’s hair, and employing 
the time in strangling the third—and that the father, in 
despair at the extraordinary conduct of his family, had 
stabbed himself, and was feeling for his pencil-case, to 
make a memorandum of having done so. 

All this time I had no opportunity of asking my Amelia 
for a sitting, but during luncheon I succeeded in finding 
one, and, after introducing the subject of photographs in 
general, I turned to her and said, "before the day is out, 
Miss Amelia, I hope to do myself the honour of coming to 
you for a negative.” 



A photographer’s day out 983 

With a sweet smile she replied “certainly, Mr. Tubbs. 
There is a cottage near here, that I wish you would try 
after luncheon, and when you’ve done that, I shall be at 
your service.” 

“Faix! an’ I hope she’ll give you a decoisive one!” 
broke in that awkward Captain Flanaghan, “wo’n’t you, 
Mely Darlint?” “I trust so, Captain Flanaghan,”.I inter¬ 
posed with great dignity; but all politeness is wasted on 
that animal; he broke into a great “haw! haw!” and 
Amelia and I could hardly refrain from laughing at his 
folly. She, however, with ready tact turned it off, saying 
to the bear, “come, come, Captain, we mustn’t be too 
hard on him!” (Hard on me\ on me\ bless thee, Amelia!) 

The sudden happiness of that moment nearly overcame 
me; tears rose to my eyes as I thought, “the wish of a Life 
is accomplished! I shall photograph an Amelia!” Indeed, 
I almost think I should have gone down on my knees to 
thank her, had not the table-cloth interfered with my so 
doing, and had I not known what a difficult position it is 
to recover from. 

However, I seized an opportunity toward the close of 
the meal to give utterance to my overwrought feelings: 
turning toward Amelia, who was sitting next to me, I 
had just murmured the words, “there beats in this bosom 
a heart,” when a general silence warned me to leave the 
sentence unfinished. With the most admirable presence of 
mind she said, “some tart, did you say, Mr. Tubbs? 
Captain Flanaghan, may I trouble you to cut Mr. Tubbs 
some of that tart? ” 

“It’s nigh done,” said the captain, poking his great 
head almost into it, “will I send him the dish, Mely?” 

“No, sir!” I interrupted, with a look that ought to have 
crushed him, but he only grinned and said, “don’t be 
modest now, Tubbs, me bhoy, sure there’s plenty more 
in the larder.” 

Amelia was looking anxiously at me, so I swallowed 
my rage— and the tart. 

Luncheon over, after receiving directions by which to 



STORIES 


984 

find the cottage, I attached to my camera the hood used 
for developing pictures in the open air, placed it over my 
shoulder, and set out for the hill which had been pointed 
out to me. 

My Amelia was sitting in the window working, as I 
passed with the machine; the Irish idiot was with her. In 
reply to my look of undying affection, she said anxiously, 
“I’m sure that’s too heavy for you, Mr. Tubbs. Won’t 
you have a boy to carry it?” 

“Or a donkey?” giggled the captain. 

I pulled up short, and faced round, feeling that now, 
if ever, the dignity of Man, and the liberty of the subject, 
must be asserted. To her I merely said, “thanks, thanks!” 
kissing my hand as I spoke; then, fixing my eyes on the 
idiot at her side, I hissed through my clenched teeth, “we 
shall meet again, Captain /” 

“Sure, I hope so, Tubbs,” said the unconscious block¬ 
head, “sharp six is the dinner hour, mind!” A cold shiver 
passed over me; I had made my great effort, and had 
failed ; I shouldered my camera again, and strode 
moodily on. 

Two steps, and I was myself again; her eyes, I knew, 
were upon me, and once more I trod the gravel with an 
elastic tread. What mattered to me, in that moment, the 
whole tribe of captains? should they disturb my equa¬ 
nimity? 

The hill was nearly a mile from the house, and I 
reached it tired and breathless. Thoughts of Amelia, how¬ 
ever, bore me up. I selected the best point of view for the 
cottage, so as to include a farmer and cow in the picture, 
cast one fond look toward the distant villa, and, mutter¬ 
ing, “Amelia, ’tis for thee!” removed the lid of the lens; 
in 1 minute and 40 seconds I replaced it: “it is over!” I 
cried in uncontrollable excitement, “Amelia, thou art 
mine!” 

Eagerly, tremblingly, I covered my head with the hood, 
and commenced the development. Trees rather misty— 
well! the wind had blown them about a little; that 



a photographer’s day out 985 

wouldn’t show much—the farmer? well, he had walked 
on a yard or two, and I should be sorry to state how many 
arms and legs he appeared with—never mind! call him a 
spider, a centipede, anything—the cow? I must, however 
reluctantly, confess that the cow had three heads, and 
though such an animal may be curious, it is not pictur¬ 
esque. However, there could be no mistake about the 
cottage; its chimneys were all that could be desired, and, 
“all things considered,” I thought, "Amelia will ” 

At this point my soliloquy was interrupted by a tap on 
the shoulder, more peremptory than suggestive. I with¬ 
drew myself from the hood, need I say with what quiet 
dignity? and turned upon the stranger. He was a thick- 
built man, vulgar in dress, repulsive in expression, and 
carried a straw in his mouth: his companion outdid him 
in these peculiarities. “Young man,” began the first, "ye’re 
trespassing here, and ya mun take yourself off, and no 
bones about it.” I need hardly say that I took no notice 
of this remark, but took up the bottle of hypo-sulphite of 
soda, and proceeded to fix the picture; he tried to stop 
me; I resisted: the negative fell, and was broken. I re¬ 
member nothing further, except that I have an indistinct 
notion that I hit somebody. 

If you can find anything in what I have just read to 
you to account for my present condition, you are wel¬ 
come to do so; but, as I before remarked, all I can tell you 
is that I am shaken, and sore, and stiff, and bruised, and 
that how I came so I haven’t the faintest idea. 



WILHELM VON SCHMITZ 


Chapter I 

“ ’Twas Ever Thus” 

(Old Play) 

The sultry glare of noon was already giving place to the 
cool of a cloudless evening, and the lulled ocean was 
washing against the Pier with a low murmur, suggestive 
to poetical minds of the kindred ideas of motion and 
lotion., when two travelers might have been seen, by such 
as chose to look that way, approaching the secluded town 
of Whitby by one of those headlong paths, dignified by 
the name of road, which serve as entrances into the place, 
and which were originally constructed, it is supposed, on 
the somewhat fantastic model of pipes running into a 
water-butt. The elder of the two was a sallow and care¬ 
worn man; his features were adorned with what had been 
often at a distance mistaken for a moustache, and were 
shaded by a beaver hat, of doubtful age, and of appear¬ 
ance which, if not respectable, was at least venerable. The 
younger, in whom the sagacious reader already recognizes 
the hero of my tale, possessed a form which, once seen, 
could scarcely be forgotten: a slight tendency to obesity 
proved but a trifling drawback to the manly grace of its 
contour, and though the strict laws of beauty might per¬ 
haps have required a somewhat longer pair of legs to 
make up the proportion of his figure, and that his eyes 
should match rather more exactly than they chanced to 
do, yet to those critics who are untrammeled with any 
laws of taste, and there are many such, to those who 
could close their eyes to the faults in his shape, and single 
out its beauties, though few were ever found capable of 
the task, to those above all who knew and esteemed his 
personal character, and believed that the powers of his 

986 



WILHELM VON SCHMITZ 987 

mind transcended those of the age he lived in, though 
alas! none such has as yet turned up—to those he was a 
very Apollo. 

What though it had not been wholly false to assert that 
too much grease had been applied to his hair, and too 
little soap to his hands? that his nose turned too much up, 
and his shirt collars too much down? that his whiskers 
had borrowed all the colour from his cheeks, excepting 
a little that had run down into his waistcoat? Such trivial 
criticisms were unworthy the notice of any who laid claim 
to the envied title of the connoisseur. 

He had been christened William, and his father's name 
was Smith, but though he had introduced himself to many 
of the higher circles in London under the imposing name 
of “Mr. Smith, of Yorkshire”, he had unfortunately not 
attracted so large a share of public notice as he was con¬ 
fident he merited: some had asked him how far back he 
traced his ancestry; others had been mean enough to 
hint that his position in society was not entirely unique; 
while the sarcastic enquiries of others touching the dor¬ 
mant peerage in his family, to which, it was suggested, he 
was about to lay claim, had awakened in the breast of the 
noble-spirited youth an ardent longing for that high birth 
and connection which an adverse Fortune had denied 
him. 

Hence he had conceived the notion of that fiction, 
which perhaps in his case must be considered merely as 
a poetical licence, whereby he passed himself off upon the 
world under the sounding appellation which heads this 
tale. This step had already occasioned a large increase in 
his popularity, a circumstance which his friends spoke of 
under the unpoetical simile of a bad sovereign fresh gilt, 
but which he himself more pleasantly described as, “. . . 
a violet pale, At length discovered in its mossy dale, And 
borne to sit with kings”: a destiny for which, as it is 
generally believed, violets are not naturally fitted. 

The travelers, each buried in his own thoughts, paced 
in silence down the steep, save when an unusually sharp 



STORIES 


988 

stone, or an unexpected dip in the road, produced one of 
those involuntary exclamations of pain, which so trium¬ 
phantly demonstrate the connection between Mind and 
Matter. At length the young traveler, rousing himself 
with an effort from his painful reverie, broke upon the 
meditations of his companion with the unexpected ques¬ 
tion, “Think you she will be much altered in feature? I 
trust me not." “Think who?” testily rejoined the other: 
then hastily correcting himself, with an exquisite sense 
of grammar, he substituted the expressive phrase, “Who’s 
the she you’re after?’’ “Forget you then,” asked the young 
man, who was so intensely poetical in soul that he never 
spoke in ordinary prose, “forget you the subject we con¬ 
versed on but now? Trust me, she hath dwelt in my 
thoughts ever since.” "But now!” his friend repeated, in 
sarcastic tone, "it is an hour good since you spoke last.” 
The young man nodded assent; “An hour? true, true. We 
were passing Lyth, as I bethink me, and lowly in thine 
ear was I murmuring that touching sonnet to the sea I 
writ of late, beginning, ‘Thou roaring, snoring, heaving, 

grieving main which-’ ” "For pity's sake!” interrupted 

the other, and there was real earnestness in that pleading 
tone, “don’t let us have it all again! I have heard it with 
patience once already.” 

“Thou hast, thou hast,” the baffled poet replied: “well 
then, she shall again be the topic of my thoughts,” and 
he frowned and bit his lip, muttering to himself such 
words as cooky, hooky, and crooky, as if he were trying 
to find a rhyme to something. And now the pair were 
passing near a bridge, and shops were on their left and 
water on their right; and from beneath uprose a confused 
hubbub of sailors' voices, and, wafted on the landward 
breeze, came an aroma, dimly suggestive of salt herring, 
and all things from the heaving waters in the harbour to 
the light smoke that floated gracefully above the house¬ 
tops, suggested nought but poetry to the mind of the 
gifted youth. 



WILHELM VON SCHMITZ 


989 


Chapter II 

“And I, for One" 

[Old Play) 

“But about she,” resumed the man of prose, “what’s her 
name? You never told me that yet.” A faint flush crossed 
the interesting features of the youth; could it be that her 
name was unpoetical, and did not consort with his ideas 
of the harmony of nature? He spoke reluctantly and in¬ 
distinctly; “Her name”, he faintly gasped, “is Sukie.” 

A long, low whistle was the only reply; thrusting his 
hands deep in his pockets, the elder speaker turned away, 
while the unhappy youth, whose delicate nerves were 
cruelly shaken by his friend’s ridicule, grasped the railing 
near to him to steady his tottering feet. Distant sounds 
of melody from the cliff at this moment reached their 
ears, and while his unfeeling comrade wandered in the 
direction of the music, the distressed poet hastily sought 
the Bridge, to give his pent-up feelings vent, unnoticed 
by the passers-by. 

The Sun was setting as he reached the spot, and the still 
surface of the waters below, as he crossed on to the 
Bridge, calmed his perturbed spirit, and sadly leaning his 
elbows on the rail, he pondered. What visions filled that 
noble soul, as, with features that would have beamed with 
intelligence, had they only possessed an expression at all, 
and a frown that only needed dignity to be appalling, 
he fixed upon the sluggish tide those fine though blood¬ 
shot eyes? 

Visions of his early days; scenes from the happy time 
of pinafores, treacle, and innocence; through the long 
vista of the past came floating spectres of long-forgotten 
spelling-books, slates scrawled thick with dreary sums, 
that seldom came out at all, and never came out right; 
tingling and somewhat painful sensations returned to his 



990 STORIES 

knuckles and the roots of his hair; he was a boy once 
more. 

“Now, young man there!” so broke a voice upon the 
air, “tak whether o’ the two roads thou likes, but thou 
ca’n’t stop in’t middle!” The words fell idly on his ears, 
or served but to suggest new trains of reverie; "Roads, 
aye, roads,” he whispered low, and then louder, as the 
glorious idea burst upon him, “Aye, and am I not the 
Colossus of Rhodes?” he raised his manly form erect at 
the thought, and planted his feet with a firmer stride. 

. . . Was it but a delusion of his heated brain? or stern 
reality? slowly, slowly yawned the bridge beneath him, 
and now his footing is already grown unsteady, and now 
the dignity of his attitude is gone: he recks not, come 
what may; is he not a Colossus? 

. . . The stride of a Colossus is possibly equal to any 
emergency; the elasticity of fustian is limited; it was at 
this critical juncture that “the force of nature could no 
further go”, and therefore deserted him, while the force 
of gravity began to operate in its stead. 

In other words, he fell. 

And the “Hilda” went slowly on its way, and knew' not 
that it passed a poet under the Bridge, and guessed not 
whose were those two feet, that disappeared through the 
eddying waters, kicking with spasmodic energy; and men 
pulled into a boat a dripping, panting form, that re¬ 
sembled a drowned rat rather than a Poet; and spoke to it 
without awe, and even said, “young feller,” and some¬ 
thing about “greenhorn”, and laughed; what knew they 
of Poetry? 

Turn we to other scenes: a long, low room, with high- 
backed settees, and a sanded floor: a knot of men drink¬ 
ing and gossiping: a general prevalence of tobacco; a 
powerful conviction that spirits existed somewhere: and 
she, the fair Sukie herself, gliding airily through the scene, 
and bearing in those lily hands—what? Some garland 
doubtless, wreathed of the most fragrant flowers that 
grow? Some cherished volume, morocco-bound and 



WILHELM VON SCHMITZ 


991 

golden-clasped, the works immortal of the bard of eld, 
whereon she loveth oft to ponder? Possibly, “The Poems 
of William Smith,” that idol of her affections, in two 
volumes quarto, published some years agone, whereof one 
copy only has as yet been sold, and that he bought him¬ 
self—to give to Sukie. Which of these is it that the beau¬ 
teous maiden carries with such tender care? Alas none: 
it is but those two "goes of arf-an-arf, warm without”, 
which have just been ordered by the guests in the tap- 
room. 

In a small parlour hard by, unknown, untended, though 
his Sukie was so near, wet, moody, and dishevelled, sat 
the youth: the fire had been kindled at his desire, and 
before it he was now drying himself, but as “the cheery 
blaze. Blithe harbinger of wintry days”, to use his own 
powerful description, consisted at present of a feeble, 
spluttering faggot, whose only effect was to half-choke 
him with its smoke, he may be pardoned for not feeling, 
more keenly than he does, that “. . . fire of Soul, When 
gazing on the kindling coal, A Britain feels that, spite of 
fone, He wots his native hearth his own!” we again 
employ his own thrilling words on the subject. 

The waiter, unconscious that a Poet sat before him, 
was talking confidingly; he dwelt on various themes, and 
still the youth sat heedless, but when at last he spoke of 
Sukie, those dull eyes flashed with fire, and cast upon 
the speaker a wild glance of scornful defiance, that was 
unfortunately wasted, as its object was stirring the fire at 
the moment and failed to notice it. “Say, oh say those 
words again!” he gasped. “I surely heard thee not aright!’/ 
The waiter looked astonished, but obligingly repeated his 
remark, “I were merely a saying, sir, that she’s an un¬ 
common clever girl, and as how I were 'oping some day 

to hacquire her Hart, if so be that-” He said no more, 

for the Poet with a groan of anguish, had rushed dis¬ 
tractedly from the room. 



992 


STORIES 


Chapter III 

“Nay, Tis Too Much!” 

[Old Play) 

Night, solemn night. 

On the present occasion the solemnity of night’s ap¬ 
proach was rendered far more striking than it is to 
dwellers in ordinary towns, by that time-honoured cus¬ 
tom observed by the people of Whitby, of leaving their 
streets wholly unlighted: in thus making a stand against 
the deplorably swift advance of the tide of progress and 
civilization, they displayed no small share of moral cour¬ 
age and independent judgment. Was it for a people of 
sense to adopt every new-fangled invention of the age, 
merely because their neighbours did? It might have been 
urged, in disparagement of their conduct, that they only 
injured themselves by it, and the remark would have been 
undeniably true; but it would only have served to exalt, 
in the eyes of an admiring nation, their well-earned char¬ 
acter of heroic self-denial and uncompromising fixity of 
purpose. 

Headlong and desperate, the lovelorn Poet plunged 
through the night; now tumbling up against a doorstep, 
and now half down in a gutter, but ever onward, onward, 
reckless where he went. 

In the darkest spot of one of those dark streets (the 
nearest lighted shop window being about fifty yards off), 
chance threw into his way the very man he fled from, 
the man whom he hated as a successful rival, and who 
had driven him to this pitch of frenzy. The waiter, not 
knowing what was the matter, had followed him to see 
that he came to no harm, and to bring him back, little 
dreaming of the shock that awaited him. 

The instant the Poet perceived who it was, all his 
pent-up fury broke forth: to rush upon him, to grasp him 
by the throat with both hands, to dash him to the 



WILHELM VON SCHMITZ 993 

ground, and there to reduce him to the extreme verge of 
suffocation—all this was the work of a moment. 

"Traitor! villain! malcontent! regicide!” he hissed 
through his closed teeth, taking any abusive epithet that 
came into his head, without stopping to consider its suit¬ 
ability. "Is it thou? Now shalt thou feel my wrath!” And 
doubtless the waiter did experience that singular sensa¬ 
tion, whatever it may have been, for he struggled vio¬ 
lently with his assailant, and bellowed "murder” the in¬ 
stant he recovered his breath. 

"Say not so,” the Poet sternly answered, as he released 
him; "it is thou that murderest me.” The waiter gathered 

himself up, and began in great surprise, ‘ ‘Why, I never-'' 

" ’Tis a lie!” the Poet screamed; "she loves thee not! Me, 
me alone.” "Who ever said she did?” the other asked, 
beginning to perceive how matters stood. "Thou! thou 
saidst it,” was the wild reply, “what, villain? acquire her 
heart? thou never shalt.” 

The waiter calmly explained himself: "My ’ope were, 
Sir, to hacquire her Hart of waiting at table, which she 
do perdigious well, sure-ly: seeing that I were thinking 
of happlying for to be ’eadwaiter at the ’otel.” The Poet’s 
wrath instantly abated, indeed, he looked rather crest¬ 
fallen than otherwise; "Excuse my violence,” he gently 
said, “and let us take a friendly glass together.” "I agree,” 
was the waiter's generous answer, "but man halive, you’ve 
ruinated my coat!” 

“Courage,” cried our hero gaily, “thou shalt have a new 
one anon: aye, and of the best cashmere.” “H’m,” said the 

other, hesitatingly, “wouldn't hany other stuff-” "I will 

not buy thee one of any other stuff,” returned the Poet, 
gently but decidedly, and the waiter gave up the point. 

Arrived once more at the friendly tavern, the Poet 
briskly ordered a jorum of Punch, and, on its being fur¬ 
nished, called on his friend for a toast. “I'll give you,” 
said the waiter, who was of a sentimental turn, however 
little he looked like it, "I’ll give you—Woman! She 
doubles our sorrows and 'alves our joy.” The Poet drained 



STORIES 


994 

his glass, not caring to correct his companion’s mistake, 
and at intervals during the evening the same inspiring 
sentiment was repeated. And so the night wore away, and 
another jorum of Punch was ordered, and another. 

* * * * * 

“And now hallow me,’’ said the waiter, attempting for 
about the tenth time to rise on his feet and make a speech, 
and failing even more signally than he had yet done, "to 
give a toast for this 'appy hoccasion. Woman! she doubles 

■-” but at this moment, probably in illustration of his 

favourite theory, he "doubled” himself up, and so effec¬ 
tually, that he instantly vanished under the table. 

Occupying that limited sphere of observation, it is con¬ 
jectured that he fell to moralizing on human ills in gen¬ 
eral, and their remedies, for a solemn voice was presently 
heard to issue from his retreat, proclaiming feelingly 
though rather indistinctly, that "when the 'art of man is 

hopressed with care-” here came a pause, as if he 

wished to leave the question open to discussion, but as no 
one present seemed competent to suggest the proper course 
to be taken in that melancholy contingency, he attempted 
to supply the deficiency himself with the remarkable 
statement "she’s hall my fancy painted ’er”. 

Meanwhile the Poet was sitting, smiling quietly to him¬ 
self, as he sipped his punch: the only notice he took of 
his companion’s abrupt disappearance was to help him¬ 
self to a fresh glass, and say, “your health!” in a cordial 
tone, nodding to where the waiter ought to have been. 
He then cried, "hear, hear!” encouragingly, and made an 
attempt to thump the table with his fist, but missed it. 
He seemed interested in the question regarding the heart 
oppressed with care, and winked sagaciously with one eye 
two or three times, as if there were a good deal he could 
say on that subject, if he chose; but the second quotation 
roused him to speech, and he at once broke into the 
waiter’s subterranean soliloquy with an ecstatic fragment 
from the poem he had been just composing: 



WILHELM VON SCHMITZ 


995 


“What though the world be cross and crooky ? 

Of Life’s fair flowers the fairest bouquet 
I plucked, when I chose thee, my Sukie! 

“Say, could'st thou grasp at nothing greater 
Than to be wedded to a waiter? 

And did’st thou deem thy Schmitz a traitor? 

“Nay! the fond waiter was rejected. 

And thou, alone, with flower-bedecked head. 
Sitting, did’st sing of one expected. 

“And while the waiter, crazed and silly. 

Dreamed he had won that precious lily. 

At length he came, thy wished-for Willie. 

“And then thy music took a new key. 

For whether Schmitz be boor or duke, he 
Is all in all to faithful Sukie!” 

He paused for a reply, but a heavy snoring from be¬ 
neath the table was the only one he got. 


Chapter IV 

"Is This the Hend?” 

(“Nicholas Nickleby”) 

Bathed in the radiance of the newly-risen Sun, the bil¬ 
lows are surging and bristling below the Cliff, along 
which the Poet is thoughtfully wending his way. It may 
possibly surprise the reader that he should not ere this 
have obtained an interview with his beloved Sukie: he 
may ask the reason: he will ask in vain: to record with 
rigid accuracy the progress of events is the sole'duty of 
the historian: were he to go beyond that, and attempt to 
dive into the hidden causes of things, the why and the 
wherefore, he would be trespassing on the province of the 
metaphysician. 

Presently the Poet reached a small rising ground at the 



STORIES 


996 

end of the gravel walk, where he found a seat command¬ 
ing a view of the sea, and here he sunk down wearily. 

For a while he gazed dreamily upon the expanse of 
ocean, then, struck by a sudden thought, he opened a 
small pocket book, and proceeded to correct and complete 
his last poem. Slowly to himself he muttered the words 
“death—saith—breath”, impatiently tapping the ground 
with his foot. “Ah, that'll do,” he said at last, with an air 
of relief, “breath”: 

‘‘His barque had perished in the storm. 

Whirled by its fiery breath 
On sunken rocks, his stalwart form 
Was doomed to watery death.” 

"That last line’s good,” he continued exaltingly, “and 
on Coleridge’s principle of alliteration, too—W. D., W. D. 
—was doomed to watery death.” 

“Take care,” growled a deep voice in his ear, “what 
you say will be used in evidence against you—now it’s 
no use trying that, we’ve got you tight,” this last remark 
being caused by the struggles of the Poet, naturally in¬ 
dignant at being unexpectedly collared by two men from 
behind. 

“He’s confessed to it, constable? you heard him?” said 
the first speaker (who rejoiced in the euphonious title of 
Muggle, and whom it is almost superfluous to introduce 
to the reader as the elder traveler of Chapter One)! “it's 
as much as his life is worth.” 

“I say, stow that-” warmly responded the other; 

“seems to me the gen’leman was a spouting potry.” 

“What—what’s the matter?” here gasped our unfor¬ 
tunate hero, who had recovered his breath; “you— 
Muggle—what do you mean by it ? ” 

“Mean by it!” blustered his quondam friend, “what do 
you mean by it, if it comes to that? You’re an assassin, 
that’s what you are! Where’s the waiter you had with 
you last night? answer me that!” 

"The—the waiter?” slowly repeated the Poet, still 



WILHELM VON SCHMITZ 997 

stunned by the suddenness of his capture, “why, he’s 
dr-” 

“I knew’it!” cried his friend, who was at him in a mo¬ 
ment, and choked up the unfinished word in his throat, 
“drowned, Constable! I told you so—and who did it?” 
he continued, loosing his grip a moment to obtain an 
answer. 

The Poet’s answer, so far as it could be gathered (for it 
came out in a very fragmentary state, and as it were by 
crumbs, in intervals of choking), was the following: “It 
was my—my—you’ll kill me—fault—I say, fault—I—I— 

gave him—you—you’re suffoca—I say—I gave him-” 

“a push I suppose,” concluded the other, who here “shut 
off” the slender supply of breath he had hitherto allowed 
his victim “and he fell in: no doubt. I heard some one 
had fallen off the Bridge last night,” turning to the Con¬ 
stable; "no doubt this unfortunate waiter. Now mark my 
words! from this moment I renounce this man as my 
friend: don’t pity him, constable! don’t think of letting 
him go to spare my feelings!” 

Some convulsive sounds were heard at this moment 
from the Poet, which, on attentive consideration, were 
found to be “the punch—was—was too much—for him— 
quite—it—quite ” “Miserable man!” sternly inter¬ 
posed Muggle; “can you jest about it? You gave him a 
punch, did you? and what then?” 

“It quite—quite—upset him,” continued the unhappy 
Schmitz, in a sort of rambling soliloquy, which was here 
cut short by the impatience of the Constable, and the 
party set forth on their return to the town. 

But an unexpected character burst upon the scene and 
broke into a speech far more remarkable for energetic 
delivery than for grammatical accuracy: "I’ve only just 
'erd of it—I were hasleep under table—’avin’ taken more 
punch than I could stand—he’s as hinnocent as I am— 
dead indeed! I’m more alive than you, a precious sight!” 

This speech produced various effects on its hearers: the 
Constable calmly released his man, the bewildered 



STORIES 


998 

Muggle muttered “Impossible! conspiracy—perjury— 
have it tried at assizes”: while the happy Poet rushed 
into the arms of his deliverer crying in a broken voice: 
“No, never from this hour to part. We’ll live and love so 
true!” a sentiment which the waiter did not echo with the 
cordiality that might have been expected. 

Later in the day, Wilhelm and Sukie were sitting con¬ 
versing with the waiter and a few friends, when the peni¬ 
tent Muggle suddenly entered the room, placed a folded 
paper on the knees of Schmitz, pronounced in a hollow 
tone the affecting words “be happy!” vanished, and was 
seen no more. 

After perusing the paper, Wilhelm rose to his feet; in 
the excitement of the moment he was roused into un¬ 
conscious and extempore verse: 

“My Sukie! He hath bought, yea, Muggle’s self. 
Convinced at last of deeds unjust and foul. 

The licence of a vacant public-house. 

We are licensed here to sell to all. 

Spirits, porter, snuff, and ale!” 

So we leave him: his after happiness who dare to 
doubt? has he not Sukie? and having her, he is content. 



THE LEGEND OF SCOTLAND 


Being a true and terrible report touching the rooms of 
Auckland Castell, called Scotland, and of the things there 
endured by Matthew Dixon, Chaffer, and of a certain 
Ladye, called Gaunless of some, there apparent, and how 
that none durst in these days sleep therein (belike through 
fear), all which things fell out in ye days of Bishop Bee, 
of chearfull memorie, and were writ down by mee in the 
Yeere One Thousand Three Hundred and Twenty Five, 
in the Month February, on a certayn Tuesday and other 
days. 

Edgar Cuthwellis. 

Now the said Matthew Dixon, having fetched wares 
unto that place, my Loords commended the same, and 
bade that hee should be entertained for that night, (which 
in sooth hee was, supping with a grete Appetite,) and 
sleep in a certayn roome of that apartment now called 
Scotland—From whence at Midnight hee rushed forth 
with so grete a Screem, as awaked all men, and hastily 
running into those Passages, and meeting him so screem- 
ing, hee presentlie faynted away. 

Whereon they hadde hym into my Loorde’s parlour, 
and with much ado set hym on a Chaire, wherefrom hee 
three several times split even to the grounde, to the grete 
admiration of all men., 

But being stayed with divers Strong Liquors, (and, 
chifest, wyth Gin,) he after a whyle gave foorth in a 
lamentable tone these following particulars, all which 
were presentlie sworn to by nine painful and stout 
farmers, who lived hard by, which witness I will heare 
orderlie set downe. 

Witness of Matthew Dixon, Chaffer, being in my right 
minde, and more than Fortie Yeeres of Age, though sore 
affrighted by reason of Sightes and Sounds in This Castell 
endured by mee, as touching the Vision of Scotland, and 

999 



1000 


STORIES 


the Ghosts, all two of them, therein contayned, and of A 
certayn straunge Ladye, and of the lamentable thyngs by 
her uttered, with other sad tunes and songs, by her and 
by other Ghosts devised, and of the coldness and shakyng 
of my Bones (through sore grete feer), and of other 
things very pleasant to knowe, cheefly of a Picture here¬ 
after suddenlie to bee taken, and of what shall befall 
thereon, (as trulie foreshowne by Ghosts,) and of Dark¬ 
ness, with other things more terrible than Woordes and 
of that which Men call Chimera. 

Matthew Dixon, Chaffer, deposeth: “that hee, having 
supped well over Night on a Green Goose, a Pasty, and 
other Condiments of the Bishop’s grete bountie provided, 
(looking, as he spake, at my Loorde, and essaying toe 
pull offe hys hatte untoe hym, but missed soe doing, for 
that hee hadde yt not on hys hedde,) soe went untoe 
hys bedde, where of a long tyme bee was exercysed with 
sharp and horrible Dreems. That hee saw yn hys Dreem 
a young Ladye, habited, not (as yt seemed) yn a Gaun, 
but yn a certayn sorte of Wrapper, perchance a Wrap- 
Rascal.” (Hereon a Mayde of the House affirmed that noe 
Ladye woold weare such a thing, and hee answered, "I 
stand corrected,” and indeed rose from hys chaire, yet 
fay led to stand.) 

Witness continued: “that ye sayde Ladye waved toe 
and froe a Grete Torche, whereat a thin Voyce shreeked 
‘Gaunless! Gaunless!’ and Shee standyng yn the midst of 
the floor, a grete Chaunge befell her, her Countenance 
waxing ever more and more Aged, and her Hayr grayer, 
shee all that tyme saying yn a most sad Voyce, ‘Gaunless, 
now, as Ladyes bee: yet yn yeeres toe come they shall not 
lacke for Gauns.'' At whych her Wrapper seemed slowlie 
toe melte, chaunging into a gaun of sylk, which puckered 
up and down, yea, and flounced itself out not a lyttle”: 
(at thys mye Loorde, waxing impatient, smote hym 
roundlie onne the hedde, bydding hym finish hys tale 
anon.) 

Witness continued: “that the sayd Gaun thenne 



THE LEGEND OF SCOTLAND 1001 

chaunged ytself into divers fashyons whych shall here¬ 
after bee, loopyng ytself uppe yn thys place and yn that, 
soe gyving toe View ane pettycote of a most fiery hue, 
even Crimson toe looke upon, at whych dismal and blode- 
thirstie sight he both groned and wepte. That at the laste 
the skyrt swelled unto a Vastness beyond Man’s power 
toe tell ayded (as hee judged), bye Hoops, Cartwheels, 
Balloons, and the lyke, bearing yt uppe within. That yt 
fylled alle that Chamber, crushing hym flat untoe hys 
bedde, tylle such as she appeared toe depart, fryzzling 
hys Hayre with her Torche as she went. 

“That hee, awakyng from such Dreems, herd thereon 
a Rush, and saw a Light.” (Hereon a Mayde interrupted 
hym, crying out that there was yndeed a Rush-Light 
burning yn that same room, and woulde have sayde 
more, but that my Loorde checkt her, and sharplie bade 
her stow that, meening thereby, that she shoulde holde 
her peece.) 

Witness continued: “that being muche affrited thereat, 
whereby hys Bones were (as hee sayde), all of a dramble, 
hee essayed to leep from hys bedde, and soe quit. Yet tar¬ 
ried hee some whyle, not, as might bee thought from 
being stout of Harte, but rather of Bodye; whych tyme 
she caunted snatches of old lays, as Maister Wil Shake¬ 
speare hath yt.” 

Hereon my Loorde questioned what lays, bydding hym 
syng the same, and saying hee knew but of two lays: 
“ ’Twas yn Trafalgar’s bay wee saw the Frenchmen lay”, 
and “There wee lay all that day yn the Bay of Biscay-0”, 
whych hee forthwyth hummed aloud, yet out of tune, at 
whych somme smyled. 

Witness continued: "that hee perchaunce coulde chaunt 
the sayde lays wyth Music, but unaccompanied hee durst 
not.” On thys they hadde hym to the Schoolroom, where 
was a Musical Instrument, called a Paean-o-Forty (mean¬ 
ing that yt hadde forty Notes, and was a Paean or 
Triumph of Art), whereon two young ladyes, Nieces of 
my Loorde, that abode there (leming, as they deemed, 



1002 


STORIES 


Lessons; but, I wot, idlynge not a lyttle), did wyth much 
thumpyng playe certyn Music wyth hys synging, as best 
they mighte, seeing that the Tunes were such as noe Man 
had herde before. 

Lorenzo dwelt at Heighington, 

(Hys cote was made of Dimity,) 

Least-ways yf not exactly there, 

Yet yn yts close proximity. 

Hee called on mee—-hee stayed to tee— 

Yet not a word he ut-tered, 

Untyl I sayd, "D’ye lyke your bread 
Dry?” and hee answered "But-tered”. 

(Chorus whereyn all present joyned with fervour.) 

Noodle dumb 
Has a noodle-head, 

1 hate such noodles, I do. 

Witness continued: "that shee then appeared unto hym 
habited yn the same loose Wrapper, whereyn hee first 
saw her yn hys Dreem, and yn a stayd and piercing tone 
gave forth her History as followeth.” 


The Ladye’s History 

“On a dewie autumn evening, mighte have been seen, 
pacing yn the grounds harde by Aucklande Castell, a 
yong Ladye of a stiff and perky manner, yet not ill to 
look on, nay, one mighte saye, faire to a degree, save that 
haply that hadde been untrue. 

“That yong Ladye, O miserable Man, was X” (whereon 
I demanded on what score shee held mee miserable, and 
shee replied, yt mattered not). “I plumed myself yn those 
tymes on my exceeding not soe much beauty as loftiness 
of Figure, and gretely desired that some Painter might 
paint my picture; but they ever were too high, not yn 
skyll I trow, but yn charges.” (At thys I most humbly 
enquired at what charge the then Painters wrought, but 



THE LEGEND OF SCOTLAND IOO 3 

shee loftily affirmed that money-matters were vulgar and 
that she knew not, no, nor cared.) 

“Now yt chaunced that a certyn Artist, hight Lorenzo, 
came toe that Quarter, having wyth hym a merveillous 
machine called by men a Chimera (that ys, a fabulous 
and wholly incredible thing;) where wyth hee took manie 
pictures, each yn a single stroke of Tyme, whiles that a 
Man might name ‘John, the son of Robin' (I asked her, 
what might a stroke of Tyme bee, but shee, frowning, 
answered not). 

“He yt was that undertook my Picture: yn which I 
mainly required one thyng, that yt shoulde bee at full- 
length, for yn none other way mighte my Loftiness bee 
trulie set forth. Nevertheless, though hee took manie Pic¬ 
tures, yet all fayled yn thys: for some, beginning at the 
Hedde reeched not toe the Feet; others, takyng yn the 
Feet, yet left out the Hedde; whereof the former were a 
grief unto myself, and the latter a Laughing-Stocke unto 
others. 

"At these thyngs I justly fumed, having at the first 
been frendly unto hym (though yn sooth hee was dull), 
and oft smote hym gretely on the Eares, rending from 
hys Hedde certyn Locks, whereat crying out hee was wont 
toe saye that I made hys lyfe a burden untoe hym, whych 
thyng I not so much doubted as highlie rejoyced yn. 

“At the last hee counselled thys, that a Picture shoulde 
bee made, showing so much skyrt as mighte reasonably 
bee gotte yn, and a Notice set below toe thys effect: ‘Item, 
two yards and a Half Ditto, and then the Feet.’ Byt thys 
no Whit contented mee, and thereon I shut hym ynto the 
Cellar, where hee remaned three Weeks, growing dayly 
thinner and thinner, till at the last hee floted up and 
downe like a Feather. 

"Now yt fell at thys tyme, as I questioned hym on a 
certyn Day, yf hee woulde nowe take mee at full-length, 
and hee replying untoe mee, yn a little moning Voyce, 
lyke a Gnat, one chaunced to open the Door: whereat the 
Draft bore hym uppe ynto a Cracke of the Cieling, and 



STORIES 


1004 

I remaned awaytyng hym, holding uppe my Torche, until 
such time as I also faded ynto a Ghost, yet stickyng untoe 
the Wall." 

Then did my Loorde and the Companie haste down 
ynto the Cellar, for to see thys straunge sight, to whych 
place when they came, my Loorde bravely drew hys 
sword, loudly crying "Death!” (though to whom or what 
he explained not); then some went 3 m, but the more part 
hung back, urging on those yn front, not soe largely bye 
example, as Words of cheer; yet at last all entered, my 
Loorde last. 

Then they removed from the wall the Casks and other 
stuff, and founde the sayd Ghost, dredful toe relate, yet 
extant on the Wall, at which horrid sight such screems 
were raysed as yn these days are seldom or never herde; 
some faynted, others bye large drafts of Beer saved them¬ 
selves from that Extremity, yet were they scarcely alive 
for Feer. 

Then dyd the Ladye speak unto them yn suchwise: 

"Here I bee, and here I byde, 

Till such tyme as yt betyde 
That a Ladye of thys place, 

Lyke to mee yn name and face, 

(Though my name bee never known, 

My initials shall bee shown,) 

Shall be fotograffed aright— 

Hedde and Feet bee both yn sight— 

Then my face shall disappear. 

Nor agayn affrite you heer.” 

Then sayd Matthew Dixon unto her, “Wherefore hold- 
est thou uppe that Torche?” to whych shee answered, 
"Candles Gyve Light”: but none understood her. 

After thys a thyn Voyce sayd from overhedde: 

" Yn the Auckland Castell cellar, 

Long, long ago, 

I was shut—a brisk young feller— 

Woe, woe, ah woe! 



THE LEGEND OF SCOTLAND 


1005 


To take her at full-lengthe 
I never hadde the strengthe 
Tempore (and soe I tell her) 

Practerito!” 

(Yn thys Chorus they durst none joyn, seeing that 
Latyn was untoe them a Tongue unknown.) 

“She was hard—oh, she was cruel— 

Long, long ago. 

Starved mee here—not even gruel— 

No, believe mee, no!— 

Frae Scotland could I flee, 

I’d gie my last bawbee,— 

Arrah, bhoys, fair play’s a jhewel, 

Lave me, darlints, goe!” 

Then my Loorde, putting bye hys Sworde (whych was 
layd up thereafter, yn memory of soe grete Bravery), 
bade hys Butler fetch hym presentlie a Vessel of Beer, 
whych when yt was brought at hys nod (nor, as hee 
merrily sayd, hys “nod, and Bee, and wreathed smyle”), 
hee drank hugelie thereof: “for why?” quoth hee, “surely 
a Bee ys no longer a Bee, when yt ys Dry.” 








THE OFFER OF 
THE CLARENDON TRUSTEES 


" Accommodated: That is, when a 
man is, as they say, accommodated: 
or when a man is — being—whereby 
—he may be thought to be accom¬ 
modated; which is an excellent 
thing.” 

(Written in 1868 as a letter suggesting, half-humorously, 
half-seriously, new means for mathematical research.) 

DEAR SENIOR CENSOR: 

In a desultory conversation on a point connected with 
the dinner at our high table, you incidentally remarked 
to me that lobster-sauce, “though a necessary adjunct to 
turbot, was not entirely wholesome.” 

It is entirely unwholesome. I never ask for it without 
reluctance: I never take a second spoonful without a feel¬ 
ing of apprehension on the subject of possible nightmare. 
This naturally brings me to the subject of Mathematics, 
and of the accommodation provided by the University 
for carrying on the calculations necessary in that impor¬ 
tant branch of Science. 

As Members of Convocation are called upon (whether 
personally, or, as is less exasperating, by letter) to con¬ 
sider the offer of the Clarendon Trustees, as well as every 
other subject of human, or inhuman, interest, capable of 
consideration, it has occurred to me to suggest for your 
consideration how desirable roofed buildings are for carry¬ 
ing on mathematical calculations: in fact, the variable 
character of the weather in Oxford renders it highly in¬ 
expedient to attempt much occupation, of a sedentary 
nature, in the open air. 

2K V 


1009 


L.C. 


1010 


A MISCELLANY 


Again, it is often impossible for students to carry on 
accurate mathematical calculations in close contiguity to 
one another, owing to their mutual interference, and a 
tendency to general conversation: consequently these pro¬ 
cesses require different rooms in which irrepressible con¬ 
versationalists, who are found to occur in every branch of 
Society, might be carefully and permanently fixed. 

It may be sufficient for the present to enumerate the 
following requisites: others might be added as funds per¬ 
mitted. 

A. A very large room for calculating Greatest Common 
Measure. To this a small one might be attached for Least 
Common Multiple: this, however, might be dispensed 
with. 

B. A piece of open ground for keeping Roots and prac¬ 
tising their extraction: it would be advisable to keep 
Square Roots by themselves, as their corners are apt to 
damage others. 

C. A room for reducing Fractions to their Lowest 
Terms. This should be provided with a cellar for keeping 
the Lowest Terms when found, which might also be 
available to the general body of undergraduates, for the 
purpose of “keeping Terms”. 

D. A large room, which might be darkened, and fitted 
up with a magic lantern, for the purpose of exhibiting 
Circulating Decimals in the act of circulation. This might 
also contain cupboards, fitted with glass-doors, for keep¬ 
ing the various Scales of Notation. 

E. A narrow strip of ground, railed off and carefully 
leveled, for investigating the properties of Asymptotes, 
and testing practically whether Parallel Lines meet or 
not: for this purpose it should reach, to use the expressive 
language of Euclid, “ever so far”. 

This last process, of “continually producing the 
Lines”, may require centuries or more: but such a period, 
though long in the life of an individual, is as nothing in 
the life of the University. 

As Photography is now very much employed in re- 



THE NEW METHOD OF EVALUATION IOII 

cording human expressions, and might possibly be 
adapted to Algebraical Expressions, a small photographic 
room would be desirable, both for general use and for 
representing the various phenomena of Gravity, Disturb¬ 
ance of Equilibrium, Resolution, etc., which affect the 
features during severe mathematical operations. 

May I trust that you will give your immediate attention 
to this most important subject? 

Believe me, 

Sincerely yours, 

MATHEMATICUS 

February 6, 1868. 


THE NEW METHOD OF 
EVALUATION 

AS APPLIED TO 77 

“LITTLE JACK HORNER 
SAT IN A CORNER 
EATING HIS CHRISTMAS PIE.” 

The problem of evaluating tt which has engaged the at¬ 
tention of mathematicians from the earliest ages, had, 
down to our own time, been considered as purely arith¬ 
metical. It was reserved for this generation to make the 
discovery that it is in reality a dynamical problem: and 
the true value of it which appeared an ignis fatuus to our 
forefathers, has been at last obtained under pressure. 

The following are the main data of the problem: 

Let U =the University, G = Greek, and P = Professor. 
Then GP= Greek Professor; let this be reduced to its 
lowest terms, and call the result J. 

Also let W=the work done, T=the Times, P =the 



1012 


A MISCELLANY 


given payment, 7r=the payment according to T, and S 
=the sum required; so that rr=S. 

The problem is, to obtain a value for v which shall be 
commensurable with W. 

In the early treatises on this subject, the mean value as¬ 
signed to 7r will be found to be 40.000000. Later writers 
suspected that the decimal point had been accidentally 
shifted, and that the proper value was 400.00000: but, as 
the details of the process for obtaining it had been lost, no 
further progress was made in the subject till our own time, 
though several most ingenious methods were tried for 
solving the problem. 

Of these methods we proceed to give some brief ac¬ 
count. Those chiefly worthy of note appear to be Rational¬ 
ization, the Method of Indifferences, Penrhyn’s Method, 
and the Method of Elimination. 

We shall conclude with an account of the great dis¬ 
covery of our own day, the Method of Evaluation under 
Pressure. 


I. Rationalization 

The peculiarity of this process consists in its affecting all 
quantities alike with a negative sign. 

To apply it, let H = High Church, and L = Low Church, 
then the geometric mean = N /HL: call this “B" (Broad 
Church). 


.*. HL = B 2 . 

Also let x andy represent unknown quantities. 

The process now requires the breaking up of U into its 
partial factions, and the introduction of certain combina¬ 
tions. Of the two principal factions thus formed, that cor¬ 
responding with P presented no further difficulty, but it 
appeared hopeless to rationalize the other. 

A reductio ad absurdum was therefore attempted, and 
it was asked "why should n not be evaluated?" The 
great difficulty now was, to discovery. 



THE NEW METHOD OF EVALUATION IOI3 

Several ingenious substitutions and transformations 
were then resorted to, with a view to simplifying the 
equation, and it was at one time asserted, though never 
actually proved, that the y’s were all on one side. How¬ 
ever, as repeated trials produced the same irrational 
result, the process was finally abandoned. 

II. The Method of Indifferences 

This was a modification of “the method of finite Differ¬ 
ences '”, and may be thus briefly described: 

Let E= Essays, and R = Reviews: then the locus of 
(E + R), referred to multilinear coordinates, will be found 
to be a superficies ( i.e ., a locus possessing length and 
breadth, but no depth). Let v= novelty, and assume 
(E + R) as a function of v. 

Taking this superficies as the plane of reference, we 
get— 

E = R=B 

EB =B 2 = HL (By the last article) 

Multiplying by P, EBP = HPL. 

It was now necessary to investigate the locus of EBP: 
this was found to be a species of Catenary, called the 
Patristic Catenary, which is usually defined as “passing 
through origen, and containing many multiple points”. 
The locus of HPL will be found almost entirely to coin¬ 
cide with this. 

Great results were expected from the assumption of 
(E + R) as a function of v : but the opponents of this 
theorem having actually succeeded in demonstrating that 
the ^-element did not even enter into the function, it ap¬ 
peared hopeless to obtain any real value of 7r by this 
method. 

III. Penrhyn’s Method 

This was an exhaustive process for extracting the value 
of 77 in a series of terms, by repeated divisions. The series 
so obtained appeared to be convergent, but the residual 



A MISCELLANY 


1014 

quantity was always negative, which of course made the 
process of extraction impossible. 

This theorem was originally derived from a radical ser¬ 
ies in Arithmetical Progression: let us denote the series 
itself by A.P., and its sum by (A.P.)S. It was found that 
the function (A.P.)S. entered into the above process, in 
various forms. 

The experiment was therefore tried of transforming 
(A.P.)S. into a new scale of notation: it had hitherto been, 
through a long series of terms, entirely in the senary, in 
which scale it had furnished many beautiful expressions: 
it was now transferred into the denary. 

Under this modification, the process of division was re¬ 
peated, but with the old negative result: the attempt was 
therefore abandoned, though not without a hope that 
future mathematicians, by introducing a number of 
hitherto undetermined constants, raised to the second 
degree, might succeed in obtaining a positive result. 


IV. Elimination of J 

It had long been perceived that the chief obstacle to the 
evaluation of n was the presence of J, and in an earlier 
age of mathematics J would probably have been referred 
to rectangular axes, and divided into two unequal parts—■ 
a process of arbitrary elimination which is now considered 
not strictly legitimate. 

It was proposed, therefore, to eliminate J by an appeal 
to the principle known as “the permanence of equivalent 
formularies this, however, failed on application, as J 
became indeterminate. Some advocates of the process 
would have preferred that J should be eliminated in toto. 
The classical scholar need hardly be reminded that toto is 
the ablative of tumtum, and that this beautiful and ex¬ 
pressive phrase embodied the wish that J should be 
eliminated by the compulsory religious examination. 

It was next proposed to eliminate J by means of a can- 
onisant. The chief objection to this process was, that it 



THE NEW METHOD OF EVALUATION 1015 

would raise J to an inconveniently high power, and would 
after all only give an irrational value for it. 

Other processes, which we need not here describe, have 
been suggested for the evaluation of rr. One was, that it 
should be treated as a given quantity: this theory was 
supported by many eminent men, at Cambridge and else¬ 
where; but, on application, J was found to exhibit a nega¬ 
tive sign, which of course made the evaluation impossible. 

We now proceed to describe the modem method, which 
has been crowned with brilliant and unexpected success, 
and which may be defined as 

V. Evaluation Under Pressure 

Mathematicians had already investigated the locus of 
HPL, and had introduced this function into the calcula¬ 
tion, but without effecting the desired evaluation, even 
when HPL was transferred to the opposite side of the 
equation, with a change of sign. The process we are about 
to describe consists chiefly in the substitution of G for P, 
and the application of pressure. 

Let the function <f> (HGL) be developed into a series, 
and let the sum of this be assumed as a perfectly rigid 
body, moving in a fixed line; let “fx” be the coefficient of 
moral obligation, and “e” the expediency. Also let “F” be 
a Force acting equally in all directions, and varying in¬ 
versely as T: let A = Able, and E = Enlightened. 

We have now to develop <f> (HGL) by Maclaurin’s 
Theorem. 

The function itself vanishes when the variable vanishes: 

i.e. <f> ( o) =0 

<f>' (o) = C (a prime constant) 

< k" (o) = 2. J. 

<f>” ' (o) =2.3.H 

r " (0H2.3.4.S 

4 > .(o) =2.3.4.5 .p 

0 .(o) = 2.34.5.6. J 

after which the quantities recur in the same order. 



I0l6 A MISCELLANY 

The above proof is taken from the learned treatise 
“Augusti de fallibilitate historicorum”, and occupies an 
entire Chapter: the evaluation of tt is given in the next 
Chapter. The author takes occasion to point out several 
remarkable properties, possessed by the above series, the 
existence of which had hardly been suspected before. 

This series is a function both of fx and of e: but, when it 
is considered as a body, it will be found that fx = o and 
that e only remains. 

We now have the equation 

<f> (HGL) = 0 + C+ J+ H+ S+ P+J. 

The summation of this gave a minimum value for tt: 
this, however, was considered only as a first approxima¬ 
tion, and the process was repeated under pressure EAF, 
which gave to tt a partial maximum value: by continually 
increasing EAF, the result was at last obtained. 

7r=S =500.00000. 

The result differs considerably from the anticipated 
value, namely 400.00000: still there can be no doubt that 
the process has been correctly performed, and that the 
learned world may be congratulated on the final settle¬ 
ment of this most difficult problem. 


THE DYNAMICS OF A PARTI-CLE 

“ ’Tis strange the mind, that very fiery particle, 

Should let itself be snuff'd out by an article." 

(First printed in 1865 as an Oxford pamphlet, this article 
concerns itself with the then existing political situation.) 

INTRODUCTION 

It was a lovely Autumn evening, and the glorious effects 
of chromatic aberration were beginning to show them- 




THE DYNAMICS OF A PARTI-CLE IOI 7 

selves in the atmosphere as the earth revolved away from 
the great western luminary, when two lines might have 
been observed wending their weary way across a plane 
superficies. The elder of the two had by long practice ac¬ 
quired the art, so painful to young and impulsive loci, of 
lying evenly between his extreme points; but the younger, 
in her girlish impetuosity, was ever longing to diverge and 
become an hyperbola or some such romantic and bound¬ 
less curve. They had lived and loved: fate and the inter¬ 
vening superficies had hitherto kept them asunder, but 
this was no longer to be: a line had intersected them, 
making the two interior angles together less than two 
right angles. It was a moment never to be forgotten, and, 
as they journeyed on, a whisper thrilled along the super¬ 
ficies in isochronous waves of sound, “Yes! We shall at 
length meet if continually produced!” (Jacobi's Course of 
Mathematics, Chap, i.) 

We have commenced with the above quotation as a 
striking illustration of the advantage of introducing the 
human element into the hitherto barren region of Mathe¬ 
matics. Who shall say what germs of romance, hitherto 
unobserved, may not underlie the subject? Who can tell 
whether the parallelogram, which in our ignorance we 
have defined and drawn, and the whole of whose proper¬ 
ties we profess to know, may not be all the while panting 
for exterior angles, sympathetic with the interior, or 
sullenly repining at the fact that it cannot be inscribed 
in a circle? What mathematician has ever pondered 
over an hyperbola, mangling the unfortunate curve 
with lines of intersection here and there, in his efforts 
to prove some property that perhaps after all is a 
mere calumny, who has not fancied at last that the ill- 
used locus was spreading out its asymptotes as a silent 
rebuke, or winking one focus at him in contemptuous 
pity? 

In some such spirit as this we have compiled the fol¬ 
lowing pages. Crude and hasty as they are, they yet ex¬ 
hibit some of the phenomena of light, or “enlightenment”, 



ioi8 


A MISCELLANY 


considered as a force, more fully than has hitherto been 
attempted by other writers. 

June, 1865. 


Chapter I 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Definitions 
1 

Plain Superficiality is the character of a speech, in 
which any two points being taken, the speaker is found to 
lie wholly with regard to those two points. 


n 

Plain Anger is the inclination of two voters to one 
another, who meet together, but whose views are not in 
the same direction. 


hi 

When a Proctor, meeting another Proctor, makes the 
votes on one side equal to those on the other, the feeling 
entertained by each side is called right anger. 


iv 

When two parties, coming together, feel a Right Anger, 
each is said to be complementary to the other (though, 
strictly speaking, this is very seldom the case). 


v 

Obtuse Anger is that which is greater than Right 
Anger. 



THE DYNAMICS OF A PARTI-CLE IOI9 


Postulates 

I 

Let it be granted, that a speaker may digress from any 
one point to any other point. 

II 

That a finite argument (i.e. one finished and disposed 
of), may be produced to any extent in subsequent de¬ 
bates. 


in 

That a controversy may be raised about any question, 
and at any distance from that question. 


Axioms 

1 

Men who go halves in the same (quart) are (generally) 
equal to another. 


11 

Men who take a double in the same (term) are equal to 
anything. 


On Voting 

The different methods of voting are as follows: 

I 

Alternando, as in the case of Mr.-who voted for 

and against Mr. Gladstone, alternate elections. 

II 

Invertendo, as was done by Mr. —— who came all the 
way from Edinburgh to vote, handed in a blank voting- 
paper, and so went home rejoicing. 



1020 


A MISCELLANY 


III 

Componendo, as was done by Mr.-whose name 

appeared on both committees at once, whereby he got 
great praise from all men, by the space of one day. 

IV 

Dividendo, as in Mr.-’s case, who being sorely per¬ 

plexed in his choice of candidates, voted for neither. 

v 

Convertendo, as was wonderfully exemplified by 
Messrs.-and-who held a long and fierce argu¬ 

ment on the election, in which, at the end of two hours, 
eac. i had vanquished and converted the other. 

VI 

Ex iEQUALi in Proportions Perturbata Seu Inordi- 
nata, as in the election, when the result was for a long 
time equalized, and as it were held in the balance, by 
reason of those who had first voted on the one side seeking 
to pair off with those who had last arrived on the other 
side, and those who were last to vote on the one side being 
kept out by those who had first arrived on the other side, 
whereby, the entry to the Convocation House being 
blocked up, men could pass neither in nor out. 

On Representation 

Magnitudes are algebraically represented by letters, 
men by men of letters, and so on. The following are the 
principal systems of representation. 

1. Cartesian: i.e. by means of “cartes”. This system 
represents lines well, sometimes too well; but fails in 
representing points, particularly good points. 

2. Polar: i.e. by means of the 2 poles, “North and 
South.” This is a very uncertain system of representation, 
and one that cannot safely be depended upon. 



THE DYNAMICS OF A PARTI-CLE 


1021 


3. Trilinear: i.e. by means of a line which takes 3 dif¬ 
ferent courses. Such a line is usually expressed by three 
letters, as W.E.G. 

That the principle of Representation was known to the 
ancients is abundantly exemplified by Thucydides, who 
tells us that the favourite cry of encouragement during a 
trireme race was that touching allusion to Polar Coordi¬ 
nates which is still heard during the races of our own 
time, “p5, p6, cos <f>, they’re gaining!” 


Chapter II 

DYNAMICS OF A PARTICLE 

Particles are logically divided according to genius and 
speeches. 

Genius is the higher classification, and this, combined 
with differentia (i.e. difference of opinion), produces 
speeches. These again naturally divide themselves into 
three heads. 

Particles belonging to the great order of genius are 
called “able” or “enlightened”. 

Definitions 

I 

A surd is a radical whose meaning cannot be exactly 
ascertained. This class comprises a very large number of 
particles. 

II 

Index indicates the degree, or power, to which a par¬ 
ticle is raised. It consists of two letters, placed to the right 
of the symbol representing the particle. Thus, “A.A.” sig¬ 
nifies the oth degree; “B.A.” the 1st degree; and so on, 
till we reach “M.A.” the 2nd degree (the intermediate 
letters indicating fractions of a degree); the last two usu- 



1022 


A MISCELLANY 


ally employed being "R.A.” (the reader need hardly be 
reminded of that beautiful line in The Princess "Go dress 
yourself, Dinah, like a gorgeous R.A.”) and "S.A.” This 
last indicates the 360th degree, and denotes that the par¬ 
ticle in question (which is i/7th part of the function 
E+R "Essays and Reviews",) has effected a complete 
revolution, and that the result =0. 

in 

Moment is the product of the mass into the velocity. 
To discuss this subject fully, would lead us too far into 
the subject Vis Viva, and we must content ourselves with 
mentioning the fact that no moment is ever really lost , by 
fully enlightened Particles. It is scarcely necessary to 
quote the well-known passage: "Every moment, that can 
be snatched from academical duties, is devoted to 
furthering the cause of the popular Chancellor of the 
Exchequer.”—(Clarendon, History of the Great Rebel¬ 
lion.) 


IV 

A couple consists of a moving particle, raised to the 
degree M.A., and combined with what is technically 
called a "better half”. The following are the principal 
characteristics of a Couple: (1) It may be easily trans¬ 
ferred from point to point. (2) Whatever force of trans¬ 
lation was possessed by the uncombined particle (and this 
is often considerable), is wholly lost when the Couple is 
formed. (3) The two forces constituting the Couple habit¬ 
ually act in opposite directions. 


On Differentiation 

The effect of Differentiation on a Particle is very re¬ 
markable, the first Differential being frequently of a 
greater value than the original Particle, and the second of 
less enlightenment. 



THE DYNAMICS OF A PARTI-CLE 1023 

For example, let L = “Leader”, S = “Saturday”, and 
then L.S. = “Leader in the Saturday” (a particle of no 
assignable value). Differentiating once, we get L.S.D., a 
function of great value. Similarly it will be found that, by 
taking a second Differential of an enlightened Particle 
(i.e. raising it to the Degree D.D.), the enlightenment be¬ 
comes rapidly less. The effect is much increased by the 
addition of a C: in this case the enlightenment often van¬ 
ishes altogether, and the Particle becomes conservative. 

It should be observed that, whenever the symbol L is 
used to denote “Leader”, it must be affected with the sign 
±: this serves to indicate that its action is sometimes 
positive and sometimes negative—some particles of this 
class having the property of drawing others after them 
(as “a Leader of an army”), and others of repelling them 
(as “a leader of the Times”). 


Propositions 
prop. 1. PR. 

To find the value of a given Examiner. 

Example. A takes in 10 books in the Final Examina¬ 
tion, and gets a 3d Class: B takes in the Examiners, and 
gets a 2nd. Find the value of the Examiners in terms of 
books. Find also their value in terms in which no Exam¬ 
ination is held. 


PROP. II. PR. 

To estimate Profit and Loss. 

Example. Given a Derby Prophet, who has sent 3 differ¬ 
ent winners to 3 different betting-men, and given that 
none of the three horses are placed. Find the total Loss 
incurred by the three men (a) in money, ( b ) in temper. 
Find also the Prophet. Is this latter generally possible? 



1024 


A MISCELLANY 


PROP. III. PR. 

To estimate the direction of a line. 

Example. Prove that the definition of a line, according 
to Walton, coincides with that of Salmon, only that they 
begin at opposite ends. If such a line be divided by Frost’s 
method, find its value according to Price. 

PROP. IV. XH. 

The end (i.e. "the product of the extremes"), justifies 
{i.e. "is equal to"—see Latin "aequus"), the means. 

No example is appended to this Proposition, for obvi¬ 
ous reasons. 

prop. v. PR. 

To continue a given series. 

Example. A and B who are respectively addicted to 
Fours and Fives, occupy the same set of rooms, which is 
always at Sixes and Sevens. Find the probable amount of 
reading done by A and B while the Eights are on. 

We proceed to illustrate this hasty sketch of the Dy¬ 
namics of a Parti-cle, by demonstrating the great Pro¬ 
position on which the whole theory of Representation 
depends, namely: "To remove a given Tangent from a 
given Circle, and to bring another given Line into con¬ 
tact with it.” 

To work the following problem algebraically, it is best 
to let the circle be represented as referred to its two tan¬ 
gents, i.e. first to WEG, WH, and afterwards to WH, 
GH. When this is effected, it will be found most conven¬ 
ient to project WEG to infinity. The process is not given 
here in full, since it requires the introduction of many 
complicated determinants. 

PROP. VI. PR. 

To remove a given Tangent from a given Circle, and to 
bring another given Line into contact with it. 



THE DYNAMICS OF A PARTI-CLE 1025 

Let UNIV be a Large Circle, whose centre is O (V be¬ 
ing, of course, placed at the top), and let WGH be a tri¬ 
angle, two of whose sides, WEG and WH, are in contact 
with the circle, while GH (called "the base” by liberal 
mathematicians), is not in contact with it. (See Fig.i.) It 
is required to destroy the contact of WEG, and to bring 
GH into contact instead. 

Let I be the point of maximum illumination of the 
circle, and therefore E the point of maximum enlighten¬ 
ment of the triangle. (E of course varying perversely as 
the square of the distance from O.) 

Let WH be fixed absolutely, and remain always in con¬ 
tact with the circle, and let the direction of 01 be also 
fixed. 

Now, so long as WEG preserves a perfectly straight 
course, GH cannot possibly come into contact with the 
circle, but if the force of illumination, acting along 01, 
cause it to bend (as in Fig. 2), a partial revolution on the 
part of WEG and GH is effected, WEG ceases to touch 
the circle, and GH is immediately brought into contact 
with it. Q.E.F. 

The theory involved in the foregoing Proposition is at 
present much controverted, and its supporters are called 
upon to show what is the fixed 'point , or locus standi, on 
which they propose to effect the necessary revolution. To 
make this clear, we must go to the original Greek, and 
remind our readers that the true point or locus standi, is 
in this case ’aphis (or ‘aphis according to modern usage), 
and therefore must not be assigned to WEG. In reply to 
this it is urged that, in a matter like the present, a single 
word cannot be considered a satisfactory explanation, 
such as aphecos. 

It should also be observed that the revolution here dis¬ 
cussed is entirely the effect of enlightenment, since parti¬ 
cles, when illuminated to such an extent as actually to 
become pios, are always found to diverge more or less 
widely from each other; though undoubtedly the radical 
force of the word is "union” or "friendly feeling”. The 



1026 


A miscellany 


reader will find in “Liddell and Scott” a remarkable illus¬ 
tration of this, from which it appears to be an essential 
condition that the feeling should be entertained (jopdBrjv 
and that the particle entertaining it should belong to the 
genus aKvrvs and should therefore be, nominally at least, 
unenlightened. 


THE NEW BELFRY 
OF CHRIST CHURCH, OXFORD 

A MONOGRAPH BY D. C. L. 

“A thing of beauty is a joy forever” 

I. ON THE ETYMOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF 
THE NEW BELFRY, CH. CH. 

The word “Belfry” is derived from the French bel, 
“beautiful, becoming, meet,” and from the German frei, 
“free, unfettered, secure, safe.” Thus the word is strictly 
equivalent to “meatsafe”, to which the new Belfry bears 
a resemblance so perfect as almost to amount to coinci¬ 
dence. 


II. ON THE STYLE OF THE NEW BELFRY, CH. CH. 

The style is that which is usually known as “Early De¬ 
based”: very early, and remarkably debased. 

III. ON THE ORIGIN OF THE NEW BELFRY, CH. CH. 

Outsiders have enquired, with a persistence verging on 
personality, and with a recklessness scarcely distinguish¬ 
able from insanity, to whom we are to attribute the first 
grand conception of the work. Was it the Treasurer, say 



NEW BELFRY OF CHRIST CHURCH, OXFORD 1027 

they, who thus strove to force it on an unwilling House? 
Was it a Professor who designed this box, which, whether 
with a lid on or not, equally offends the eye? Or was it a 
Censor whose weird spells evoked the horrible thing, the 
bane of this and of succeeding generations? Until some 
reply is given to these and similar questions, they must 
and will remain—forever—unanswered! 

On this point Rumour has been unusually busy. Some 
say that the Governing Body evolved the idea in solemn 
conclave—the original motion being to adopt the Tower 
of St. Mark’s at Venice as a model: and that by a series of 
amendments it was reduced at last to a simple cube. 
Others say that the Reader in Chemistry suggested it as a 
form of crystal. There are others who affirm that the 
Mathematical Lecturer found it in the Eleventh Book of 
Euclid. In fact, there is no end to the various myths afloat 
on the subject. Most fortunately, we are in possession of 
the real story. 

The true origin of the design is as follows: we have it 
on the very best authority. 

The head of the House, and the architect, feeling a 
natural wish that their names should be embodied, in 
some conspicuous way, among the alterations then in 
progress, conceived the beautiful and unique idea of re¬ 
presenting, by means of a new Belfry, a gigantic copy of a 
Greek Lexicon. 1 But, before the idea had been reduced to 
a working form, business took them both to London for a 
few days, and during their absence, somehow (this part of 
the business has never been satisfactorily explained) the 
whole thing was put into the hands of a wandering archi¬ 
tect, who gave the name of Jeeby. As the poor man is now 
incarcerated at Han well, we will not be too hard upon his 
memory, but will only say that he professed to have ori¬ 
ginated the idea in a moment of inspiration, when idly 
contemplating one of those highly coloured, and mysteri- 

1 The editor confesses to a difficulty here. No sufficient reason 
has been adduced why a model of a Greek Lexicon should in any 
way “embody” the names of the above illustrious individuals. 



A MISCELLANY 


1028 

ously decorated chests which, filled with dried leaves 
from gooseberry bushes and quickset hedges, profess to 
supply the market with tea of genuine Chinese growth. 
Was there not something prophetic in the choice? What 
traveler is there, to whose lips, when first he enters the 
great educational establishment and gazes on its newest 
decoration, the words do not rise unbidden—“Thou tea- 
chest”? 

It is plain then that Scott, the great architect to whom 
the work of restoration has been entrusted, is not respon¬ 
sible for this. He is said to have pronounced it a casus 
belli, which (with all deference to the Classical Tutors of 
the House, who insist that he meant merely “a case for 
a bell”) we believe to have been intended as a term of 
reproach. 

The following lines are attributed to Scott: 

“If thou wouldst view the Belfry aright, 

Go visit it at the mirk midnight— 

For the least hint of open day 
Scares the beholder quite away. 

When wall and window are black as pitch. 

And there’s no deciding which is which; 

When the dark Hall’s uncertain roof 
In horror seems to stand aloof; 

When corner and corner, alternately, 

Is wrought to an odious symmetry; 

When distant Thames is heard to sigh 
And shudder as he hurries by; 

Then go, if it be worth the while, 

Then view the Belfry’s monstrous pile. 

And, home returning, soothly swear 
‘ 'Tis more than Job himself could bear!' ” 

IV. ON THE CHIEF ARCHITECTURAL MERIT OF 
THE NEW BELFRY, CH. CH. 

Its chief merit is its Simplicity—a Simplicity so pure, so 
profound, in a word, so simple, that no other word will 
fitly describe it. The meagre outline, and baldness of 



NEW BELFRY OF CHRIST CHURCH, OXFORD 1029 

detail, of the present Chapter, are adopted in humble 
imitation of this great feature. 


V. ON THE OTHER ARCHITECTURAL MERITS OF 
THE NEW BELFRY, CH. CH. 

The Belfry has no other architectural merits. 


VI. ON THE MEANS OF OBTAINING THE BEST VIEWS OF 
THE NEW BELFRY, CH. CH. 

The visitor may place himself, in the first instance, at the 
opposite corner of the Great Quadrangle, and so combine, 
in one grand spectacle, the beauties of the North and 
West sides of the edifice. He will find that the converging 
lines forcibly suggest a vanishing point, and if that 
vanishing point should in its turn suggest the thought, 
“would that it were on the point of vanishing!" he may 
perchance, like the Soldier in the Ballad, “lean upon his 
sword" (if he has one: they are not commonly worn by 
modem tourists), “and wipe away a tear." 

He may then make the circuit of the Quadrangle, 
drinking in new visions of beauty at every step— 

"Ever charming, ever new. 

When will the Belfry tire the view ? ’ ’ 

as Dyer sings in his well-known poem, “Grongar Hill"— 
and, as he walks along from the Deanery towards the 
Hall staircase, and breathes more and more freely as the 
Belfry lessens on the view, the delicious sensation of 
relief, which he will experience when it has finally dis¬ 
appeared, will amply repay him for all he will have en¬ 
dured. 

The best view of the Belfry is that selected by our 
Artist for the admirable frontispiece which he has fur¬ 
nished for the first Volume of the present work. 1 This view 

1 On further consideration, it was deemed inexpedient to extend 
this work beyond the compass of one Volume. 



A MISCELLANY 


1030 

may be seen, in all its beauty, from the far end of Merton 
Meadow. From that point the imposing position (or, more 
briefly, the imposition) of the whole structure is thrilling- 
ly apparent. There the thoughtful passer-by, with four 
right angles on one side of him, and four anglers, who 
have no right to be there, on the other, may ponder on 
the mutability of human things, or recall the names of 
Euclid and Isaac Walton, or smoke, or ride a bicycle, or 
do anything that the local authorities will permit. 


VII. ON THE IMPETUS GIVEN TO ART IN ENGLAND BY 
THE NEW BELFRY, CH. CH. 

The idea has spread far and wide, and is rapidly per¬ 
vading all branches of manufacture. Already an enter¬ 
prising maker of bonnet-boxes is advertising “the Belfry 
pattern”: two builders of bathing machines at Ramsgate 
have followed his example: one of the great London 
houses is supplying “bar-soap” cut in the same striking 
and symmetrical form: and we are credibly informed that 
Borwick’s Baking Powder and Thorley’s Food for Cattle 
are now sold in no other shape. 


VIII. ON THE FEELINGS WITH WHICH OLD CH. CH. MEN 
REGARD THE NEW BELFRY. 

Bitterly bitterly do all old Ch. Ch. men lament this 
latest lowest development of native taste. “We see the 
Governing Body,” say they: “Where is the Governing 
Mind}” And Echo (exercising a judicious "natural selec¬ 
tion” for which even Darwin would give her credit) 
answers—‘ ‘ where ? ’ ’ 

At the approaching “Gaudy”, when a number of old 
Ch. Ch. men will be gathered together, it is proposed, at 
the conclusion of the banquet, to present to each guest a 
portable model of the new Belfry, tastefully executed in 
cheese. 



NEW BELFRY OF CHRIST CHURCH, OXFORD I 03 I 


IX. ON THE FEELINGS WITH WHICH RESIDENT CH. CH. 

MEN REGARD THE NEW BELFRY. 

Who that has seen a Ch. Ch. man conducting his troop 
of “lionesses” (so called from the savage and pitiless greed 
with which they devour the various sights of Oxford) 
through its ancient precincts, that has noticed the con¬ 
vulsive start and ghastly stare that always affect new¬ 
comers when first they come into view of the new Belfry, 
that has heard the eager questions with which they assail 
their guide as to the how, the why, the what for, and the 
how long, of this astounding phenomenon, can have 
failed to mark the manly glow which immediately suf¬ 
fuses the cheek of the hapless cicerone? 

“Is it the glow of conscious pride— 

Of pure ambition gratified— 

That seeks to read in other eye 
Something of its own ecstasy ? 

Or wrath, that worldlings should make fun 
Of anything ‘the House’ has done? 

Or puzzlement, that seeks in vain 
The rigid mystery to explain ? 

Or is it shame that, knowing not 
How to defend or cloak the blot— 

The foulest blot on fairest face 
That ever marred a noble place— 

Burns with the pangs it will not own. 

Pangs felt by loyal sons alone ?” 


X. ON THE LOGICAL TREATMENT OF THE NEW 
BELFRY, CH. CH. 

The subject has been reduced to three Syllogisms. 

The first is in “Barbara”. It is attributed to the enemies 
of the Belfry. 

Wooden buildings in the midst of stone-work are bar¬ 
barous; 



1032 A MISCELLANY 

Plain rectangular forms in the midst of arches and decora¬ 
tions are barbarous; 

Ergo, The whole thing is ridiculous and revolting. 

The second is in “Celarent”, and has been most care¬ 
fully composed by the friends of the Belfry. 

The Governing Body would conceal this appalling struc¬ 
ture, if they could; 

The Governing Body would conceal the feelings of 
chagrin with which they now regard it, if they could; 
Ergo, .(MS. unfinished.) 

The third Syllogism is in '‘Festino ”, and is the joint 
composition of the friends and enemies of the Belfry. 

To restore the character of Ch. Ch., a tower must be 
built; 

To build a tower, ten thousand pounds must be raised; 
Ergo, No time must be lost. 

These three syllogisms have been submitted to the 
criticism of the Professor of Logic, who writes that "he 
fancies he can detect some slight want of logical sequence 
in the Conclusion of the third”. He adds that, according 
to his experience of life, when people thus commit a fatal 
blunder in child-like confidence that money will be forth¬ 
coming to enable them to set it right, in ten cases out of 
nine the money is not forthcoming. This is a large per¬ 
centage. 


XI. ON THE DRAMATIC TREATMENT OF 
THE NEW BELFRY, CH. CH. 

Curtain rises, discovering the Dean, Canons, and Stud¬ 
ents, seated round a table, on which the mad Architect, 
fantastically dressed, and wearing a Fool’s cap and bells, 
is placing a square block of deal. 

Dean (as Hamlet). Methinks I see a Bell-tower! 




NEW BELFRY OF CHRIST CHURCH, OXFORD IO 33 

Canons (looking wildly in all directions). Where, my 
good Sir? 

Dean. In my mind’s eye. {Knocking heard.) Who’s 
there? 

Fool. A spirit, a spirit; he says his name’s poor Tom. 

Enter The Great Bell, disguised as a mushroom. 

Great Bell. Who gives anything to poor Tom? whom 
the foul fiend hath led through bricks and through mor¬ 
tar, through rope and windlass, through plank and scaf¬ 
fold; that hath torn down his balustrades, and tom up his 
terraces; that hath made him go as a common pedlar, with 
a wooden box upon his back. Do poor Tom some charity. 
Tom’s a-cold. 

Rafters, and planks, and such small deer. 

Shall be Tom's food for many a year. 

Censor. I feared it would come to this. 

Dean {as King Lear). The little dons and all, Tutor, 
Reader, Lecturer—see, they bark at me! 

Censor. His wits begin to unsettle. 

Dean {as Hamlet). Do you see yonder box, that’s al¬ 
most in shape of a tea-caddy? 

Censor. By its mass, it is like a tea-caddy, indeed. 

Dean. Methinks it is like a clothes-horse. 

Censor. It is backed like a clothes-horse. 

Dean. Or like a tub. 

Censor. Very like a tub. 

Dean. They fool me to the top of my bent. 

Enter from opposite sides The Belfry as Box, and 
The Bodley Librarian as Cox. 

Librarian. Who are you, Sir? 

Belfry. If it comes to that, Sir, who are you? 

They exchange cards. 

Librarian. I should feel obliged to you if you would 
accommodate me with a more protuberant Bell-tower, 
Mr. B. The one you have now seems to me to consist of 
corners only, with nothing whatever in the middle. 

Belfry. Anything to accommodate you, Mr. Cox. 



A MISCELLANY 


1034 

(Places jauntily on his head a small model of the skeleton 
of an umbrella, upside down.) 

Librarian. Ah, tell me—in mercy tell me—have you 
such a thing as a redeeming feature, or the least mark of 
artistic design, about you? 

Belfry. No! 

Librarian. Then you are my long-lost door scraper! 
They rush into each other’s arms. 

Enter Treasurer as Ariel. Solemn music. 


SONG AND CHORUS 

Five fathom square the Belfry frowns; 

All its sides of timber made; 

Painted all in grays and browns; 

Nothing of it that will fade. 

Christ Church may admire the change— 
Oxford thinks it sad and strange. 
Beauty’s dead! Let’s ring her knell. 
Hark! now I hear them—ding-dong, bell. 


XII. ON THE FUTURE OF THE NEW BELFRY, CH. Oil. 

The Belfry has a great Future before it—at least, if it has 
not, it has very little to do with Time at all, its Past being 
(fortunately for our ancestors) a nonentity, and its Pres¬ 
ent a blank. The advantage of having been born in the 
reign of Queen Anne, and of having died in that or the 
subsequent reign, has never been so painfully apparent 
as it is now. 

Credible witnesses assert that, when the bells are rung, 
the Belfry must come down. In that case considerable 
damage (the process technically described as “pulverisa¬ 
tion”) must ensue to the beautiful pillar and roof which 
adorn the Hall staircase. But the architect is prepared 
even for this emergency. “On the first symptom of deflec¬ 
tion” (he writes from Hanwell), “let the pillar be care¬ 
fully removed and placed, with its superstruent super¬ 
structure” (we cannot forbear calling attention to this 



NEW BELFRY OF CHRIST CHURCH, OXFORD IO 35 

beautiful phrase), "in the centre of ‘Mercury’. There it 
will constitute a novel and most unique feature of the 
venerable House.” 

"Yea, and the Belfry shall serve to generations yet un¬ 
born as an aerial Ticket-office,” so he cries with his eye in 
a fine frenzy rolling, "where the Oxford and London 
Balloon shall call ere it launch forth on its celestial voy¬ 
age—and where expectant passengers shall while away 
the time with the latest edition of ‘Bell's Life’!” 

XIII. ON THE MORAL OF THE NEW BELFRY, CH. CH. 

The moral position of Christ Church is undoubtedly im¬ 
proved by it. "We have been attacked, and perhaps not 
without reason, on the Bread-and-Butter question,” she 
remarks to an inattentive World (which heeds her not, 
but prates on of Indirect Claims and of anything but 
indirect Claimants), "we have been charged—and, it 
must be confessed, in a free and manly tone—with short¬ 
comings in the payment of the Greek Professor, but who 
shall say that we are not all ‘on the square’ now}” 

This, however, is not the Moral of the matter. Every 
thing has a moral, if you choose to look for it. In Words¬ 
worth, a good half of every poem is devoted to the Moral: 
in Byron, a smaller proportion: in Tupper, the whole. 
Perhaps the most graceful tribute we can pay to the 
genius of the last-named writer, is to entrust to him, as an 
old member of Christ Church, the conclusion of this 
Monograph. 

"Look on the Quadrangle of Christ Church, squarely, for is 
it not a Square ? 

And a Square recalleth a Cube; and a Cube recalleth the 
Belfry; 

And the Belfry recalleth a Die, shaken by the hand of the 
gambler; 

Yet, once thrown, it may not be recalled, being, so to speak, 
irrevocable. 

There it shall endure for ages, treading hard on the heels 
of the Sublime— 



IO 36 A MISCELLANY 

For it is but a step, saith the wise man, from the Sublime 
unto the Ridiculous: 

And the Simple dwelleth midway between, and shareth the 
qualities of either.” 


THE VISION OF THE THREE T’S 
A THRENODY 
Contents 
Chapter I 

A Conference {held on the Twentieth of March, 1873) 
betwixt an Angler, a Hunter, and a Professor; concern¬ 
ing angling and the beautifying of Thomas his Quad¬ 
rangle. The Ballad of 1 ‘The Wandering Burgess”. 

Chapter II 

A Conference, with one distraught: who discourseth 
strangely of many things. 

Chapter III 

A Conference of the Hunter with a Tutor, whilom the 
Angler his eyes be closed in sleep. The Angler awaking 
relateth his Vision. The Hunter chaunteth “A Baccan- 
alian Ode.” 


Chapter I 

A Conference betwixt an Angler, a Hunter, and a Pro¬ 
fessor; concerning angling, and the beautifying of 
Thomas his Quadrangle. The Ballad of “The Wander¬ 
ing Burgess”. 


THE VISION OF THE THREE T’s 1037 
PISCATOR, VENATOR 

Piscator. My honest Scholar, we are now arrived at 
the place whereof I spake, and trust me, we shall have 
good sport. How say you? Is not this a noble Quadrangle 
we see around us? And be not these lawns trimly kept, 
and this lake marvellous clear? 

Venator. So marvellous clear, good Master, and withal 
so brief in compass, that methinks, if any fish of a reason¬ 
able bigness were therein, we must perforce espy it. I fear 
me there is none. 

Pise. The less fish, dear Scholar, the greater the skill in 
catching of it. Come, let’s sit down, and, while we un¬ 
pack the fishing-gear, I’ll deliver a few remarks, both as 
to the fish to be met with hereabouts, and the properest 
method of fishing. 

But you are to note first (for, as you are pleased to be 
my Scholar, it is but fitting you should imitate my habits 
of close observation) that the margin of this lake is so 
deftly fashioned that each portion thereof is at one and 
the same distance from that tumulus which rises in the 
centre. 

Ven. O’ my word, 'tis so! You have indeed a quick eye, 
dear Master, and a wondrous readiness of observing. 

Pise. Both may be yours in time, my Scholar, if with 
humility and patience you follow me as your model. 

Ven. I thank you for that hope, great Master! But ere 
you begin your discourse, let me enquire of you one 
thing touching this noble Quadrangle.—Is all we see of a 
like antiquity? To be brief, think you that those two tall 
archways, that excavation in the parapet, and that quaint 
wooden box, belong to the ancient design of the building, 
or have men of our day thus sadly disfigured the place? 

Pise. I doubt not they are new, dear Scholar. For in¬ 
deed I was here but a few years since, and saw naught of 
these things. But what book is that I see lying by the 
water’s edge? 

Ven. A book of ancient ballads, and truly I am glad to 



A MISCELLANY 


1038 

see it, as we may herewith beguile the tediousness of the 
day, if our sport be poor, or if we grow aweary. 

Pise. This is well thought of. But now to business. And 
first I’ll tell you somewhat of the fish proper to these 
waters. The Commoner kinds we may let pass: for though 
some of them be easily Plucked forth from the water, yet 
are they so slow, and withal have so little in them, that 
they are good for nothing, unless they be crammed up to 
the very eyes with such stuffing as comes readiest to hand. 
Of these the Stickleback, a mighty slow fish, is chiefest, 
and along with him you may reckon the Fluke, and divers 
others: all these belong to the "Mullet” genus, and be 
good to play, though scarcely worth examination. 

I will now say somewhat of the Nobler kinds, and 
chiefly of the Gold-fish, which is a species highly thought 
of, and much sought after in these parts, not only by men, 
but by divers birds, as for example the King-fishers: and 
note that wheresoever you shall see those birds assemble, 
and but few insects about, there shall you ever find the 
Gold-fish most lively and richest in flavour: but whereso¬ 
ever you perceive swarms of a certain gray fly, called the 
Dun-fly, there the Gold-fish are ever poorer in quality, 
and the King-fishers seldom seen. 

A good Perch may sometimes be found hereabouts: but 
for a good fat Plaice (which is indeed but a magnified 
Perch) you may search these waters in vain. They that 
love such dainties must needs betake them to some dis¬ 
tant Sea. 

But for the manner of fishing, I would have you note 
first that your line be not thicker than an ordinary bell- 
rope: for look you, to flog the water, as though you laid 
on with a flail, is most preposterous, and will surely scare 
the fish. And note further, that your rod must by no 
means exceed ten, or at the most twenty, pounds in 
weight, for- 

Ven. Pardon me, my Master, that I thus break in on so 
excellent a discourse, but there now approaches us a Col¬ 
legian, as I guess him to be, from whom we may haply 



THE VISION OF THE THREE T’S IO 39 

learn the cause of these novelties we see around us. Is not 
that a bone which, ever as he goes, he so cautiously waves 
before him? 


Enter professor 

Pisc. By his reverend aspect and white hair, I guess him 
to be some learned Professor. I give you good day, rev¬ 
erend Sir! If it be not ill manners to ask it, what bone is 
that you bear about with you? It is, methinks, a humerous 
whimsy to chuse so strange a companion. 

Prof. Your observation. Sir, is both anthropolitically 
and ambidexterously opportune: for this is indeed a Hu¬ 
merus I carry with me. You are, I doubt not, strangers in 
these parts, for else you would surely know that a Pro¬ 
fessor doth ever carry that which most aptly sets forth 
his Profession. Thus, the Professor of Uniform Rotation 
carries with him a wheelbarrow—the Professor of Gradu¬ 
ated Scansion a ladder—and so of the rest. 

Ven. It is an inconvenient and, methinks, an ill- 
advised custom. 

Prof. Trust me, Sir, you are absolutely and amor- 
phologically mistaken: yet time would fail me to show 
you wherein lies your error, for indeed I must now leave 
you, being bound for this great performance of music, 
which even at this distance salutes your ears. 

Pisc. Yet, I pray you, do us one courtesy before you go: 
and that shall be to resolve a question, whereby my friend 
and I are sorely exercised. 

Prof. Say on, Sir, and I will e’en answer you to the 
best of my poor ability. 

Pisc. Briefly, then, we would ask the cause for piercing 
the very heart of this fair building with that uncomely 
tunnel, which is at once so ill-shaped, so ill-sized, and so 
ill-lighted. 

Prof. Sir, do you know German? 

Pisc. It is my grief, Sir, that I know no other tongue 
than mine own. 

Prof. Then, Sir, my answer is this, Warum nicht? 



A MISCELLANY 


IO40 

Pise. Alas, Sir, I understand you not. 

Prof. The more the pity. For nowadays, all that is 
good comes from the German. Ask our men of science: 
they will tell you that any German book must needs sur¬ 
pass an English one. Aye, and even an English book, 
worth naught in this its native dress, shall become, when 
rendered into German, a valuable contribution to Science! 

Ven. Sir, you much amaze me. 

Prof. Nay, Sir, I’ll amaze you yet more. No learned 
man doth now talk, or even so much as cough, save only 
in German. The time has been, I doubt not, when an 
honest English “Hem!” was held enough, both to clear 
the voice and rouse the attention of the company, but 
nowadays no man of Science, that setteth any store by 
his good name, will cough otherwise than thus, Ach! 
Euch! Auch! 

Ven. ’Tis wondrous. But, not to stay you further, 
wherefore do we see that ghastly gash above us, hacked, 
as though by some wanton school-boy in the parapet ad¬ 
joining the Hall? 

Prof. Sir, do you know German? 

Ven. Believe me. No. 

Prof. Then, Sir, I need but ask you this, Wie befinden 
Sie Sich? 

Ven. I doubt not, Sir, but you are in the right on’t. 

Pise. But, Sir, I will by your favour ask you one other 
thing, as to that unseemly box that blots the fair heavens 
above. Wherefore, in this grand old City, and in so con¬ 
spicuous a place, do men set so hideous a thing? 

Prof. Be you mad, Sir? Why this is the very climac¬ 
teric and coronal of all our architectural aspirations! In 
all Oxford there is naught like it! 

Pise. It joys me much to hear you say so. 

Prof. And, trust me, to an earnest mind, the categorical 
evolution of'the Abstract, ideologically considered, must 
infallibly develop itself in the parallelepipedisation of the 
Concrete! And so farewell. 


Exit Professor 



THE VISION OF THE THREE T*S IO 4 I 

Pise. He is a learned man, and methinks there is much 
that is sound in his reasoning. 

Ven. It is all sound, as it seems to me. But how say 
you? Shall I read you one of these ballads? Here is one 
called “The Wandering Burgess", which (being forsooth a 
dumpish ditty) may well suit the ears of us whose eyes 
are oppressed with so dire a spectacle. 

Pise. Read on, good Scholar, and I will bait our hooks 
the while. 

Venator readeth 

THE WANDERING BURGESS 

Our Willie had been sae lang awa’ 

Frae bonnie Oxford toon, 

The townsfolk they were greeting a’ 

As they went up and doon. 

He hadna been gane a year, a year, 

A year but barely ten. 

When word came unto Oxford toon, 

Our Willie wad come agen. 

Willie he stude at Thomas his Gate, 

And made a lustie din; 

And who so blithe as the gate-porter 
To rise and let him in ? 

“Now enter Willie, now enter Willie, 

And look around the place, 

And see the pain that we have ta’en 
Thomas his Quad to grace.” 

The first look that our Willie cast. 

He leuch loud laughters three. 

The neist look that our Willie cast 
The tear blindit his e’e. 

Sae square and stark the Tea-chest frowned 
Athwart the upper air, 

2L L«C« 



1042 


A MISCELLANY 


But when the Trench our Willie saw, 
He thocht the Tea-chest fair. 


Sae murderous-deep the Trench did gape 
The parapet aboon. 

But when the Tunnel Willie saw 
He loved the Trench eftsoon. 


’Twas mirk beneath the tane archway, 
’Twas mirk beneath the tither; 

Ye wadna ken a man therein. 

Though it were your ain dear brither. 


He turned him round and round about. 
And looked upon the Three; 

And dismal grew his countenance, 

And drumlie grew his e’e. 


‘‘What cheer, what cheer, my gallant knight?” 

The gate-porter ’gan say. 

‘‘Saw ever ye sae fair a sight 
As ye have seen this day?” 


“Now haud your tongue of your prating, man: 

Of your prating now let me be. 

For, as I’m a true knight, a fouler sight 
I’ll never live to see. 


“Before I’d be the ruffian dark 
Who planned this ghastly show, 
I’d serve as secretary’s clerk 
To Ayrton or to Lowe. 


“Before I’d own the loathly thing 
That Christ Church Quad reveals, 
I’d serve as shoeblack’s underling 
To Odger and to Beales!” 



THE VISION OF THE THREE t’s IO43 


Chapter II 

A Conference with one distraught: who discourseth strangely 
of many things. 


PISCATOR, VENATOR 

Piscator. Tis a marvellous pleasant ballad. But look 
you, another Collegian draws near. I wot not of what sta¬ 
tion he is, for indeed his apparel is new to me. 

Venator. It is compounded, as I take it, of the diverse 
dresses of a jockey, a judge, and a North American In¬ 
dian. 

Enter lunatic 

Pisc. Sir, may I make bold to ask your name? 

Lun. With all my heart, Sir. It is Jeeby, at your ser¬ 
vice. 

Pisc. And wherefore (if I may further trouble you, be¬ 
ing as you see a stranger) do you wear so gaudy, but with¬ 
al so ill-assorted, a garb ? 

Lun. Why, Sir, I’ll tell you. Do you read the Morning 
Post? 

Pisc. Alas, Sir, I do not. 

Lun. 'Tis pity of your life you do not. For, look you, 
not to read the Post, and not to know the newest and 
most commended fashions, are but one and the same 
thing. And yet this raiment, that I wear, is not the new¬ 
est fashion. No, nor has it ever been, nor will it ever be, 
the fashion. 

Ven. I can well believe it. 

Lun. And therefore ’tis, Sir, that I wear it. ’Tis but a 
badge of greatness. My deeds you see around you. Si 
monumentum quceris, circums-pice! You know Latin? 

Ven. Not I, Sir! It shames me to say it. 

Lun. You are then (let me roundly tell you) monstrum 
horrendum, informe, ingens, cui lumen ademptum! 

Ven. Sir, you may tell it me roundly—or, if you list, 



A MISCELLANY 


1044 

squarely—or again, triangularly. But if, as you affirm, I 
see your deeds around me, I would fain know which they 
be. 

Lun. Aloft, Sir, stands the first and chiefest! That soar¬ 
ing minaret! That gorgeous cupola! That dreamlike efful¬ 
gence of- 

Ven. That wooden box? 

Lun. The same, Sir! 'Tismine! 

Ven. {after a pause ). Sir, it is worthy of you. 

Lun. Lower now your eyes by a hairsbreadth, and 
straight you light upon my second deed. Oh Sir, what toil 
of brain, what cudgelling of forehead, what rending of 
locks, went to the fashioning of it! 

Ven. Mean you that newly-made gap? 

Lun. I do. Sir. ’Tis mine! 

Ven. {after a long pause). What else, Sir? I would fain 
know the worst. 

Lun. {wildly). It comes, it comes! My third great deed! 
Lend, lend your ears—your nose—any feature you can 
least conveniently spare! See you those twin doorways? 
Tall and narrow they loom upon you—severely simple 
their outline—massive the masonry between—black as 
midnight the darkness within! Sir, of what do they mind 
you? 

Ven. Of vaults, Sir, and of charnel-houses. 

Lun. This is a goodly fancy, and yet they are not 
vaults. No, Sir, you see before you a Railway Tunnel! 

Ven. ’Tis very strange! 

Lun. But no less true than strange. Mark me. 'Tis love, 
’tis love, that makes the world go round. Society goes 
round of itself. In circles. Military society in military 
circles. Circles must needs have centres. Military circles 
military centres. 

Ven. Sir, I fail to see—— 

Lun. Lo you, said our Rulers, Oxford shall be a mili¬ 
tary centre! Then the chief est of them (glad in counten¬ 
ance, yet stony, I wot, in heart) so ordered it by his under¬ 
ling (I remember me not his name, yet is he one that can 



THE VISION OF THE THREE T’S IO45 

play a card well, and so serveth meetly the behests of that 
mighty one, who played of late in Ireland a game of crib- 
bage such as no man, who saw it, may lightly forget); 
and then, Sir, this great College, ever loyal and generous, 
gave this Quadrangle as a Railway Terminus, whereby 
the Troops might come and go. By that Tunnel, Sir, the 
line will enter. 

Pise. But, Sir, I see no rails. 

Lun. Patience, good Sir! For railing we look to the 
Public! The College doth but furnish sleepers. 

Pise. And the design of that Tunnel is- 

Lun. Is mine, Sir! Oh, the fancy! Oh, the wit! Oh, the 
rich vein of humour! When came the idea? I'the mirk 
midnight. Whence came the idea? From a cheese-scoop! 
How came the idea? In a wild dream. Hearken, and I 
will tell. Form square, and prepare to receive a canonry! 
All the evening long I had seen lobsters marching around 
the table in unbroken order. Something sputtered in the 
candle—something hopped among the tea-things— 
something pulsated, with an ineffable yearning, beneath 
the enraptured hearthrug! My heart told me something 
was coming—and something came! A voice cried 
“Cheese-scoop!” and the Great Thought of my life 
flashed upon me! Placing an ancient Stilton cheese, to 
represent this venerable Quadrangle, on the chimney- 
piece, I retired to the further end of the room, armed only 
with a cheese-scoop, and with a dauntless courage 
awaited the word of command. Charge, Cheesetaster, 
charge! On, Stilton, on! With a yell and a bound I crossed 
the room, and plunged my scoop into the very heart of 
the foe! Once more! Another yell—another bound— 
another cavity scooped out! The deed was done! 

Ven. And yet, Sir, if a cheese-scoop were your guide, 
these cavities must needs be circular. 

Lun. They were so at the first—but, like the fickle 
Moon, my guardian satellite, I change as I go on. Oh, the 
rapture, Sir, of that wild moment! And did I reveal the 
Mighty Secret! Never, never! Day by day, week by week, 



A MISCELLANY 


IO46 

behind a wooden screen, I wrought out that vision of 
beauty. The world came and went, and knew not of it. 
Oh, the ecstasy, when yesterday the Screen was swept 
away, and the Vision was a Reality! I stood by Tom- 
Gate, in that triumphal hour, and watched the passers-by. 
They stopped! They stared!! They started!!! A thrill of 
envy paled their cheeks! Hoarse inarticulate words of 
delirious rapture rose to their lips! What withheld me— 
what, I ask you candidly, withheld me from leaping upon 
them, holding them in a frantic clutch, and yelling in 
their ears “ ’Tis mine, ’tis mine!” 

Pise. Perchance, the thought that- 

Lun. You are right, Sir. The thought that there is a 
lunatic asylum in the neighbourhood, and that two med¬ 
ical certificates—but I will be calm. The deed is done. Let 
us change the subject. Even now a great musical per¬ 
formance is going on within. Wilt hear it? The Chapter 
give it—ha, ha! They give it! 

Pise. Sir, I will very gladly be their guest. 

Lun. Then, guest, you have not guessed all! You shall 
be bled, Sir, ere you go! 'Tis love, ’tis love, that makes the 
hat go round! Stand and deliver! Vivat Regina! No 
money returned! 

Pise. How mean you, Sir? 

Lun. I said, Sir, “No money returned!” 

Pise. And I said, Sir, “How mean-” 

Lun. Sir, I am with you. You have heard of Bishops’ 
Charges? Sir, what are Bishops to Chapters? Oh, it goes 
to my heart to see these quaint devices! First, sixpence 
for use of a doorscraper. Then, fivepence for right of 
choosing by which archway to approach the door. Then, 
a poor threepence for turning of the handle. Then, a 
shilling a head for admission, and half-a-crown for every 
two-headed man. Now this, Sir, is manifestly unjust: for 

you are to note that the double of a shilling- 

Pise. I do surmise, Sir, that the case is rare. 

Lun. And then, Sir, five shillings each for care of your 
umbrella! Hence comes it that each visitor of ready wit 



THE VISION OF THE THREE T’S IO47 

hides his umbrella, ere he enter, either by swallowing it 
(which is perilous to the health of the inner man), or by 
running it down within his coat, even from the nape of 
the neck, which indeed is the cause of that which you may 
have observed in me, namely, a certain stiffness in mine 
outward demeanour. Farewell, gentlemen, I go to hear 
the music. 

Exit Lunatic 


Chapter III 

A Conference of the Hunter with a Tutor, whilom the 
Angler his eyes he closed in sleep. The Angler awaking 
relateth his Vision. The Hunter chaunteth “A 
Bacchanalian Ode”. 

PISCATOR, VENATOR, TUTOR 

Venator. He hath left us, but me thinks we are not to 
lack company, for look you, another is even now at hand, 
gravely apparelled, and bearing upon his head Hoff¬ 
mann’s Lexicon in four volumes folio. 

Piscator. Trust me, this doth symbolize his craft. 
Good morrow, Sir. If I rightly interpret these that 
you bear with you, you are a teacher in this learned 
place? 

Tutor. I am, Sir, a Tutor, and profess the teaching of 
divers unknown tongues. 

Pise. Sir, we are happy to have your company, and if it 
trouble you not too much, we would gladly ask (as in¬ 
deed we did ask another of your learned body, but under¬ 
stood not his reply) the cause of these new things we see 
around us, which indeed are as strange as they are new, 
and as unsightly as they are strange. 

Tutor. Sir, I will tell you with all my heart. You must 
know then (for herein lies the pith of the matter) that the 
motto of the Governing Body is this: 



A MISCELLANY 


IO48 

“Diruit, cedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis ”; which I 
thus briefly expound. 

Diruit. “It teareth down.” Witness that fair opening 
which, like a glade in an ancient forest, we have made in 
the parapet at the sinistral extremity of the Hall. Even 
as a tree is the more admirable when the hewer’s axe hath 
all but severed its trunk—or as a row of pearly teeth, en¬ 
shrined in ruby lips, are yet the more lovely for the loss of 
one—so, believe me, this our fair Quadrangle is but en¬ 
hanced by that which foolish men in mockery call "the 
Trench”. • 

JEdificat. “Itbuildethup .” Witness that beauteous Belfry 
which, in its ethereal grace, seems ready to soar away 
even as we gaze upon it! Even as a railway-porter moves 
with an unwonted majesty when bearing a portmanteau 
on his head—or as I myself (to speak modestly) gain a 
new beauty from these massive tomes—or as ocean 
charms us most when the rectangular bathing-machine 
breaks the monotony of its curving marge—so are we 
blessed by the presence of that which an envious world 
hath dubbed "the Tea-chest”. 

Mutat quadrata rotundis. “It exchangeth square things 
for round.” Witness that series of square-headed doors 
and windows, so beautifully broken in upon by that 
double archway! For indeed, though simple (" simplex 
munditiis”, as the poet saith) it is matchless in its beauty. 
Had those twin archways been greater, they would but 
have matched those at the corners of the Quadrangle— 
had they been less, they would have copied, with an ab¬ 
ject servility, the doorways around them. In such things, 
it is only a vulgar mind that thinks of a match . The sub¬ 
ject is lowe. We seek the Unique, the Eccentric! We 
glory in this two-fold excavation, which scoffers speak of 
as "the Tunnel”. 

Ven. Come, Sir, let me ask you a pleasant question. 
Why doth the Governing Body chuse for motto so trite a 
saying? It is, if I remember me aright, an example of a 
rule in the Latin grammar. 



THE VISION OF THE THREE T’S IO49 

Tutor. Sir, if we are not grammatical, we are nothing! 

Ven. But for the Belfry, Sir. Sure none can look on it 
without an inward shudder? 

Tutor. I will not gainsay it. But you are to note that it 
is not permanent. This shall serve its time, and a fairer 
edifice shall succeed it. 

Ven. In good sooth I hope it. Yet for the time being it 
doth not, in that it is not permanent, the less disgrace the 
place. Drunkenness, Sir, is not permanent, and yet is held 
in no good esteem. 

Tutor. 'Tis an apt simile. 

Ven. And for these matchless arches (as you do most 
truly call them) would it not savour of more whole¬ 
some Art, had they matched the doorways, or the gate¬ 
ways? 

Tutor. Sir, do you study the Mathematics? 

Ven. I trust, Sir, I can do the Rule of Three as well as 
another: and for Long Division- 

Tutor. You must know, then, that there be three 
Means treated of in Mathematics. For there is the Arith¬ 
metic Mean, the Geometric, and the Harmonic. And note 
further, that a Man is that which falleth between two 
magnitudes. Thus it is, that the entrance you here behold 
falleth between the magnitudes of the doorways and the 
gateways, and is in truth the Non-harmonic Mean, the 
Mean Absolute. But that the Mean, or Middle, is ever the 
safer course, we have a notable ensample in Egyptian his¬ 
tory, in which land (as travelers tell us) the Ibis standeth 
ever in the midst of the river Nile, so best to avoid the 
onslaught of the ravenous alligators, which infest the 
banks on either side: from which habit of that wise bird is 
derived the ancient maxim "In medio tutissimus Ibis’’. 

Ven. But wherefore be they twol Surely one arch were 
at once more comely and more convenient? 

Tutor. Sir, so long as public approval be won, what 
matter for the arch? But that they are two, take this as 
sufficient explication—that they are too tall for door¬ 
ways, too narrow for gateways; too light without, too 



A MISCELLANY 


1050 

dark within; too plain to be ornamental, and withal too 
fantastic to be useful. And if this be not enough, you are 
to note further that, were it all one arch, it must needs cut 
short one of those shafts which grace the Quadrangle on 
all sides—and that were a monstrous and unheard-of 
thing, in good sooth, look you. 

Ven. In good sooth, Sir, if I look, I cannot miss seeing 
that there be three such shafts already cut short by door¬ 
ways: so that it hath fair ensample to follow. 

Tutor. Then will I take other ground, Sir, and affirm 
(for I trust I have not learned Logic in vain) that to cut 
short the shaft were a common and vulgar thing to do. 
But indeed a single arch, where folk might smoothly 
enter in, were wholly adverse to Nature, who formeth 
never a mouth without setting a tongue as an obstacle in 
the midst thereof. 

Ven. Sir, do you tell me that the block of masonry, 
between the gateways, was left there of set purpose, to 
hinder those that would enter in? 

Tutor. Trust me, it was even so; for firstly, we may 
thereby more easily control the entering crowds (“divide 
et impera” say the Ancients), and secondly, in this matter 
a wise man will ever follow Nature. Thus, in the centre 
of a hall-door we usually place an umbrella-stand—in the 
midst of a wicket-gate, a milestone—what place so suited 
for a watch-box as the centre of a narrow bridge?—Yea, 
and in the most crowded thoroughfare, where the living 
tide flows thickest, there, in the midst of all, the true ideal 
architect doth ever plant an obelisk! You may have ob¬ 
served this? 

Ven. {much bewildered). I may have done so, worthy 
Sir: and yet, methinks- 

Tutor. I must now bid you farewell; for the music, 
which I would fain hear, is even now beginning. 

Ven. Trust me, Sir, your discourse hath interested me 
hugely. 

Tutor. Yet it hath, I fear me, somewhat wearied your 
friend, who is, as I perceive, in a deep slumber. 



THE VISION OF THE THREE T'S I05I 

Ven. I had partly guessed it, by his loud and continu¬ 
ous snoring. 

Tutor. You had best let him sleep on. He hath, I take 
it, a dull fancy, that cannot grasp the Great and the Sub¬ 
lime. And so farewell: I am bound for the music. 

Exit Tutor 

Ven. I give you good day, good Sir. Awake, my Master! 
For the day weareth on, and we have catched no fish. 

Pise. Think not of fish, dear Scholar, but hearken! 
Trust me, I have seen such things in my dreams, as words 
may hardly compass! Come, Sir, sit down, and I’ll unfold 
to you, in such poor language as may best suit both my 
capacity and the briefness of our time, 

THE VISION OF THE THREE T’S 

Methought that, in some bygone Age, I stood beside the 
waters of Mercury, and saw, reflected on its placid face, the 
grand old buildings of the Great Quadrangle: near me stood 
one of portly form and courtly mien, with scarlet gown, and 
broad-brimmed hat whose strings, wide-fluttering in the 
breezeless air, at once defied the laws of gravity and marked 
the reverend Cardinal! ’Twas Wolsey's self! I would have 
spoken, but he raised his hand and pointed to the cloudless 
sky, from whence deep-muttering thunders now began to roll. 
I listened in wild terror. 

Darkness gathered overhead, and through the gloom 
sobbingly down-floated a gigantic Box! With a fearful crash 
it settled upon the ancient College, which groaned beneath it, 
while a mocking voice cried “Ha! Ha!” I looked for Wolsey: 
he was gone. Down in those glassy depths lay the stalwart 
form, with scarlet mantle grandly wrapped around it: the 
broad-brimmed hat floated, boat-like, on the lake, while the 
strings with their complex tassels, still defying the laws of 
gravity, quivered in the air, and seemed to point a hundred 
fingers at the horrid Belfry! Around, on every side, spirits 
howled in the howling blast, blatant, stridulous! 

A darker vision yet! A black gash appeared in the shud- 



A MISCELLANY 


1052 

dering parapet! Spirits flitted hither and thither with 
averted face, and warning fingers pressed to quivering lips! 

Then a wild shriek rang through the air, as, with volcanic 
roar, two murky chasms burst upon the view, and the 
ancient College reeled giddily around me! 

Spirits in patent-leather boots stole by on tiptoe, with 
hushed breath and eyes of ghastly terror! Spirits with cheap 
umbrellas, and unnecessary goloshes, hovered over me, 
sublimely pendant! Spirits with carpet-bags, dressed in 
complete suits of dittos, sped by me, shrieking “Away! 
Away! To the arrowy Rhine! To the rushing Guadalquiver! 
To Bath! To Jericho! To anywhere!” 

Stand here with me and gaze. From this thrice-favoured 
spot, in one rapturous glance gather in, and brand for ever 
on the tablets of memory, the Vision of the Three T’s! To 
your left frowns the abysmal blackness of the tenebrous Tun¬ 
nel. To your right yawns the terrible Trench. While far 
above, away from the sordid aims of Earth and the petty 
criticisms of Art, soars, tetragonal and tremendous, the 
tintinabulatory Tea-chest! Scholar, the Vision is complete! 

Ven. I am glad on’t: for in good sooth I am a-hungered. 
How say you, my Master? Shall we not leave fishing, and 
fall to eating presently? And look you, here is a song, 
which I have chanced on in this book of ballads, and 
which methinks suits well the present time and this most 
ancient place. 

Pise. Nay then, let's sit down. We shall, I warrant you, 
make a good, honest, wholesome, hungry nuncheon with 
a piece of powdered beef and a radish or two that I have 
in my fish-bag. And you shall sing us this same song as 
we eat. 

Ven. Well then, I will sing: and I trust it may content 
you as well as your excellent discourse hath oft profited 
me. 


Venator chaunteth 



THE VISION OF THE THREE T’s 


1053 


A BACCHANALIAN ODE 

Here’s to the Freshman of bashful eighteen! 

Here’s to the Senior of twenty! 

Here’s to the youth whose moustache ca’n’t be seen! 

And here’s to the man who has plenty! 

Let the men Pass! 

Out of the mass 

I’ll warrant we’ll find you some fit for a Class! 

Here’s to the Censors, who symbolize Sense, 

Just as Mitres incorporate Might, Sir! 

To the Bursar, who never expands the expense! 

And the Readers, who always do right. Sir! 

Tutor and Don, 

Let them jog on! 

I warrant they’ll rival the centuries gone! 

Here’s to the Chapter, melodious crew! 

Whose harmony surely intends well: 

For, though it commences with “harm”, it is true, 

Yet its motto is ‘ ‘All’s well that ends well! ’ ’ 

’Tis love. I’ll be bound. 

That makes it go round! 

For “In for a penny is in for a pound!” 

Here’s to the Governing Body, whose Art 
(For they’re Masters of Arts to a man, Sir!) 

Seeks to beautify Christ Church in every part, 

Though the method seems hardly to answer! 

With three T’s it is graced— 

Which letters are placed 

To stand for the names of Tact, Talent, and Taste! 

Pise. I thank you, good Scholar, for this piece of merri¬ 
ment, and this Song, which was well humoured by the 
maker, and well rendered by you. 

Ven. Oh me! Look you, Master! A fish, a fish! 

Pise. Then let us hook it. 

They hook it. 



THE BLANK CHEQUE 
A FABLE 


“Veil, perhaps,’’ said Sam, “you bought houses, vich is 
delicate English for goin’ mad; or took to buildin’, vich is a 
medical term for bein’ incurable.’’ 

“Five o’clock tea” is a phrase that our “rude fore¬ 
fathers”, even of the last generation, would scarcely have 
understood, so completely is it a thing of to-day: and yet, 
so rapid is the March of Mind, it has already risen into a 
national institution, and rivals, in its universal applica¬ 
tion to all ranks and ages, and as a specific for “all the ills 
that flesh is heir to”, the glorious Magna Charta. 

Thus, it came to pass, that, one chilly day in March, 
which only made the shelter indoors seem by contrast the 
more delicious, I found myself in the cozy little parlour of 
my old friend, kind hospitable Mrs. Nivers. Her broad 
good-humoured face wreathed itself into a sunny smile as 
I entered, and we were soon embarked on that wayw r ard 
smooth-flowing current of chat about nothing in particu¬ 
lar, which is perhaps the most enjoyable of all forms of 
conversation. John (I beg his pardon, “Mr. Nivers” I 
should say: but he was so constantly talked of, and at, by 
his better half, as “John”, that his friends were apt to for¬ 
get he had a surname at all) sat in a distant corner with 
his feet tucked well under his chair, in an attitude rather 
too upright for comfort, and rather too suggestive of gen¬ 
eral collapse for anything like dignity, and sipped his tea 
in silence. From some distant region came a sound like 
the roar of the sea, rising and falling, suggesting the pres¬ 
ence of many boys; and indeed I knew that the house was 
full to overflowing of noisy urchins, overflowing with 
high spirits and mischief, but on the whole a very credi¬ 
table set of little folk. 


1054 





THE BLANK CHEQUE 1055 

“And where are you going for your sea-side trip this 
summer, Mrs. Nivers?” 

My old friend pursed up her lips with a mysterious 
smile, and nodded. “Ca’n’t understand you,” I said. 

“You understand me, Mr. De Ciel, just as well as I 
understand myself, and that’s not saying much. I don’t 
know where we’re going: John doesn’t know where we’re 
going—but we’re certainly going somewhere ; and we 
sha’n’t even know the name of the place, till we find our¬ 
selves there! Now are you satisfied?” 

I was more hopelessly bewildered than ever. “One of us 
is dreaming, no doubt,” I faltered; “or—or perhaps I’m 

going mad, or-” The good lady laughed merrily at my 

discomfiture. 

“Well, well! It’s a shame to puzzle you so,” she said. 
“I’ll tell you all about it. You see, last year we couldn’t 
settle it, do what we would. John said, ‘Herne Bay’; and I 
said ‘Brighton’; and the boys said ‘somewhere where 
there’s a circus’; not that we gave much weight to that, 
you know: well, and Angela (she’s a growing girl, and 
we’ve got to find a new school for her, this year), she said 
‘Portsmouth, because of the soldiers’; and Susan (she’s 
my maid, you know), she said ‘Ramsgate’. Well, with all 
those contrary opinions, somehow it ended in our going 
nowhere : and John and I put our heads together last 
week, and we settled that it should never happen again. 
And now, how do you think we’ve managed it?” 

“Quite impossible to guess,” I said dreamily, as I 
handed back my empty cup. 

“In the first place,” said the good lady, “we need change 
sadly. Housekeeping worries me more every year, particu¬ 
larly with boarders—and John will have a couple of 
gentleman-boarders always on hand: he says it looks re¬ 
spectable, and that they talk so well they make the house 
quite lively. As if I couldn’t talk enough for him!” 

“It isn’t that!” muttered John. “It’s-” 

“They’re well enough sometimes,” the lady went on 
(she never seemed to hear her husband’s remarks), “but 



A MISCELLANY 


1056 

I’m sure, when Mr. Prior Burgess was here, it was enough 
to turn one’s hair grey! He was an open-handed gentle¬ 
man enough—as liberal as could be—but far too particu¬ 
lar about his meals. Why, if you’ll believe me, he wouldn’t 
sit down to dinner without there were three courses! We 
couldn’t go on in that style, you know. I had to tell the 
next boarder he must be more hardy in his notions; or I 
could warrant him we shouldn’t suit each other.” 

"Quite right,” I said. "Might I trouble you for another 
half cup?” 

"Sea-side air we must have, you see,” Mrs. Nivers went 
on, mechanically taking up the tea-pot, but too much en¬ 
grossed in the subject to do more, "and as we ca’n’t agree 
where to go, and yet we must go somewhere —did you say 
half a cup?” 

"Thanks,” said I. "You were going to tell me what it 
was you settled.” 

"We settled”, said the good lady, pouring out the tea 
without a moment’s pause in her flow of talk, "that the 
only course was—(cream I think you take, but no sugar? 
Just so)—was to put the whole matter—but stop, John 
shall read it all out to you. We’ve drawn up the agree¬ 
ment in writing—quite ship-shape, isn’t it, John? Here’s 
the document: John shall read it to you—and mind your 
stops, there’s a dear!” 

John put on his spectacles, and in a tone of gloomy 
satisfaction (it was evidently his own composition) read 
the following: 

“Be it hereby enacted and decreed, 

“That Susan be appointed for the business of choosing a 
watering-place for this season, and finding a New School for 
Angela. 

“That Susan be empowered not only to procure plans, but 
to select a plan, to submit the estimate for the execution of such 
plan to the Housekeeper; and, if the Housekeeper sanction the 
proposed expenditure, to proceed with the execution of such 
plan, and to fill up the Blank Cheque for the whole expense 
incurred.” 



THE BLANK CHEQUE IO57 

Before I could say another word the door burst open, 
and a whole army of boys tumbled into the room, headed 
by little Harry, the pet of the family, who hugged in his 
arms the much-enduring parlour cat, which, as he eagerly 
explained in his broken English, he had been trying to 
teach to stand on one leg. “Harry-Parry Ridy-Pidy 
Coachy-Poachy!” said the fond mother, as she lifted the 
little fellow to her knee and treated him to a jog-trot. 
“Harry’s very fond of Pussy, he is, but he mustn’t tease 
it, he mustn’t! Now go and play on the stairs, there’s dear 
children! Mr. De Ciel and I want to have a quiet talk.” 
And the boys tumbled out of the room again, as eagerly 
as they had tumbled in, shouting “Let’s have a Chase in 
the Hall!” 

“A good set of Heads, are they not, Mr. De Ciel?” my 
friend continued, with a wave of her fat hand towards the 
retreating army. “Phrenologists admire them much. Look 
at little Sam, there. He’s one of the latest arrivals, you 
know, but he grows—mercy on us, how that boy does 
grow! You’ve no idea what a Weight he is! Then there’s 
Freddy, that tall boy in the corner: he’s rather too big for 
the others, that’s a fact—and he’s something of a Bully at 
times, but the boy has a tender heart, too: give him a bit 
of poetry, now, and he’s as maudlin as a girl! Then there’s 
Benjy, again: a nice boy, but I daren’t tell you what he 
costs us in pocket-money! Oh, the work we had with that 
boy, till we raised his allowance! Hadn't we, John?” 
(John grunted in acquiescence.) “It was Arthur took up 
his cause so much, and worried poor John and me nearly 
into our graves! Arthur was a very nice boy, Mr. De Ciel, 
and as great a favourite with the other boys as Harry is 
now, before he went to Westminster* He used to tell them 
stories, and draw them the prettiest pictures you ever 
saw! Houses that were all windows and chimneys—what 
they call 'High Art’, I believe. We tried a conservatory 
once on the High-Art principle, and (would you believe 
it?) the man stuck the roof up on a lot of rods like so 
many knitting-needles! Of course it soon came down 



A MISCELLANY 


1058 

about our ears, and we had to do it all over again. As I 
said to John at the time, ‘If this is High Art, give me a 
little more of the Art next time, and a little less of the 
High!’ He’s doing very well at Westminster, I hear, but 
his tutor writes that he’s very asthmatic, poor fellow-” 

“.Esthetic, my dear, aesthetic!” remonstrated John. 

‘‘Ah, well, my love,” said the good lady, ‘‘all those long 
medical words are one and the same to me. And they 
come to the same thing in the Christmas bills, too: they 
both mean ‘Draught as before’! Well, well! They’re a set 
of dear good boys on the whole: they’ve only one real Vice 
among them—but I shall tire you, talking about the boys 
so much. What do you think of that agreement of ours?” 

I had been turning the paper over and over in my 
hands, quite at a loss to know what to say to so strange a 
scheme. ‘‘Surely I’ve misunderstood you?” I said. ‘‘You 
don’t mean to say that you’ve left the whole thing to 
your maid to settle for you?” 

‘‘But that’s exactly what I do mean, Mr. De Ciel,” the 
lady replied, a little testily. ‘‘She’s a very sensible young 
person, I can assure you. So now, wherever Susan chooses 
to take us, there we go!” (“There we go! There we go!” 
echoed her husband in a dismal sort of chant, rocking 
himself backwards and forwards in his chair.) “You’ve no 
idea what a comfort it is to feel that the whole thing’s in 
Susan’s hands!” 

“Go where Susan takes thee,” I remarked, with a vague 
idea that I was quoting an old song. “Well, no doubt 
Susan has very correct taste, and all that—but still, if I 
might advise, I wouldn’t leave all to her. She may need a 
little check-” 

“That’s the very word, dear Mr. De Ciel!” cried my old 
friend, clapping her kands. “And that’s the very thing 
we’ve done, isn’t it, John? ” (“The very thing we’ve done,” 
echoed John.) “I made him do it only this morning. He 
has signed her a Blank Cheque, so that she can go to any 
cost she likes. It’s such a comfort to get things settled and 
off one’s hands, you know! John’s been grumbling about 



THE BLANK CHEQUE IO59 

it ever since, but now that I can tell him it’s your advice 


“But, my dear Madam,” I faltered, “I don’t mean 
cheque with a ‘Q’!” 

“—your advice,” repeated Mrs. N., not heeding my in¬ 
terruption, “why, of course he’ll see the reasonableness of 
it, like a sensible creature as he is!” Here she looked ap¬ 
provingly at her husband, who tried to smile a “slow wise 
smile”, like Tennyson’s “wealthy miller”, but I fear the 
result was more remarkable for slowness than for wisdom. 

I saw that it would be waste of words to argue the mat¬ 
ter further, so took my leave, and did not see my old 
friends again before their departure for the sea-side. I 
quote the following from a letter which I received yester¬ 
day from Mrs. Nivers: 

“Margate, April 1. 

“Dear Friend, 

“ You know the old story of the dinner-party, where there was 
nothing hot but the ices, and nothing cold but the soup? Of this 
place I may fairly say that there is nothing high but the prices, 
the staircases, and the eggs; nothing low but the sea and the 
company: nothing strong but the butter; and nothing weak but 
the tea!” 

From the general tenor of her letter I gather that they 
are not enjoying it. 


Moral 

Is it really seriously proposed—in the University of Ox¬ 
ford, and towards the close of the Nineteenth Century [never 
yet reckoned by historians as part of the Dark Ages)—to sign 
a Blank Cheque for the expenses of building New Schools, 
before any estimate has been made of those expenses—before 
any plan has been laid before the University, from which 
such an estimate could be made—before any architect has 
been found to design such a plan—before any Committee has 
been elected to find such an architect? 



TWELVE MONTHS 
IN A CURATORSHIP 


BY ONE WHO HAS TRIED IT 

(As Curator of the Common Room at Christ Church, Oxford, 
C. L. Dodgson was obliged to prepare a report. He could not 
miss the opportunity to give these selections a Carrollean 
flavour.) 


PREFACE 

This book is not a plagiarism—as its name might at first 
suggest—of "Five Years in Penal Servitude”. Nor, again, 
is it meant to traverse precisely the same ground as “Six 
Months on the Treadmill”. There is a general resem¬ 
blance, no doubt, to both the above works: still, it may be 
claimed for the present memoir, that it deals with some 
phases of humanity not hitherto analyzed, and narrates 
some woes that are peculiarly its own. 

An apology is needed for its great length: but I have 
not had time to condense it into smaller compass. 

The record, which I here propose to lay before the mem¬ 
bers of Ch. Ch. Common Room . . . will be found largely 
autobiographical (a euphemism for "egotistic”), slightly 
apologetic, cautiously retrospective, and boldly pro¬ 
phetic: it will be at once financial, carbonaceous, aesthetic,' 
chalybeate, literary, and alcoholic: it will be pervaded 
with mystery, and spiced with hints of thrilling plots arid 
deeds of darkness.. . . 

Would Common Room "be surprised to hear” that I 
have been breaking the rules .. . with all the abandon of a 
bull, when critically inspecting a collection of old Dres¬ 
den China? I meant, of course, the letter of the rules . . . 
an instance will be found in the Rules of the Wine Com¬ 
mittee, which have fared but badly at my hands: “Com¬ 
pound and comminuted fracture” is the scientific term, I 

1060 



TWELVE MONTHS IN A CURATORSHIP Io6l 


believe, for the process I have put them through: but this 
matter is too awful to be dealt with here: it must have a 
section to itself. . . . 


OF WINE 

Whether this subject is quite the noblest to which Time 
and Thought can be devoted by Man is a question I leave 
on one side for the moment . . . one curious phenomenon 
I wish to call attention to. The consumption of Madeira 
(B) has been, during the past year, zero. [The total wine 
consumption was about 3,000 bottles for the previous 
year.] After careful calculation, I estimate that, if this 
rate of consumption be steadily maintained, our present 
stock will last us an infinite number of years. And al¬ 
though there may be something monotonous and dreary 
in the prospect of such vast cycles spent in drinking 
second-class Madeira, we may yet cheer ourselves with 
the thought of how economically it can be done. . . . 

OF LIQUEURS 

. .. The asterisks [in the accompanying list] indicate 
the degree of goodness according to the views of a certain 
Member of the Wine-Committee, who, in the noblest 
spirit of self-sacrifice, came day after day to taste the 
samples, on which views I (being one whose opinion on 
such points is worth absolutely nothing) entirely coincide. 

OF THE WINE COMMITTEE 

The Wine-Committee was a very simple organism at 
first—a sort of Amoeba, with so brief a code of rules that it 
was all but structureless. But as time went on it developed 
and its rules grew ever more complex and stringent till 
they became, in the humble opinion of the present Cura¬ 
tor, rather too tight a fit to be altogether comfortable.... 

Perhaps the most interesting feature in the career of the 
Committee has been its gentle fading away in dimensions 
—“fine by degrees, and beautifully less”. 



1062 


A MISCELLANY 


Tune: “Ten Little Niggers” 

“Four frantic Members of a chosen Commit tee\ 

One of them resigned, then there were Three. 

"Three thoughtful Members: they may pull us through! 

One was invalided—then there were Two. 

“Two tranquil Members: much may yet be done! 

But they never came together, so I had to work with One.” 

And I find, by the records of the business transacted dur¬ 
ing the year, that much of it was done with only this very 
limited number of Members present besides the Curator. 


OF CHALYBEATE WATERS 

It is not the happy lot of every Curator to be criticized, 
not only by resident members of the C.R., but also by dis¬ 
tant correspondents. I have received, during this past 
year, a long series of letters from one writer, of a highly 
critical—not to say hostile—tendency. These have been 
fired off at me with a monotonous regularity, having all 
the persistency—without the pathos—of minute-guns. 
. . . What most amuses me in this series of projectiles is 
the novel view it gives me of my position as Curator. I had 
been weak enough to picture myself to myself as a well- 
worked and slightly worried individual, trying, to the best 
of his poor judgment, to do his duty by the friends who 
had entrusted their Common Room to his care—acknow¬ 
ledging responsibility to those friends as a body, but 
most certainly not to single members of that body, still 
less to outside-critics—and behold, I find I am a dark con¬ 
spirator, going about in cloak and domino, with daggers 
and detonators, and withal liable to be put in the dark 
and lectured by any soi-disant judge that chooses to don 
the wig and gown! All this is, as Tennyson says "sweet 
and strange to me”. 



TWELVE MONTHS IN A CURATORSHIP IO63 
A VISION OF THE FUTURE 

It was in 1983, and the new Curator was in an awful 
dilemma. . . . Only a month ago, passing the Common 
Room one. afternoon, he had noticed the cellar door open, 
and strolling in had found two shabbily-dressed men fill¬ 
ing a coal-sack with bottles of old Port. They had de¬ 
clined to explain their motives, and left hastily. But the 
Curator had been true to his duty. “It is a question of 
keeping wine ”, he said to himself, “and can only be de¬ 
cided by a majority of the Wine-Committee at a duly- 
summoned meeting.” . . . 

And now, within the last few days, the Common Room, 
ever anxious to oblige their Curator in all things, had de¬ 
vised a new Code of Rules, which fitted him to a T, like a 
pair of new handcuffs—a Code of Rules which, as they 
fondly hoped, he would welcome as something really 
striking and stringent. . . . [Rule 6] “Nothing shall be 
done, or left undone, by the Curator without the concur¬ 
rence of the Wine-Committee. And, if the Curator shall 
complain of cold, it shall be the duty of the Committee to 
make things warm for him.” 

After this Code had passed into law, the members of the 
Common Room went about with elastic steps, and hearts 
bursting with joy and thankfulness. “The wild beast is 
caged at last!” they were always saying to each other, 
shaking hands whenever they met. The Curator appeared 
to be less entirely at his ease. His walk was suggestive of 
Tight Boots, his countenance of Toothache, while his gen¬ 
eral deportment was that of a man whose system has been 
demoralized by too much Tea.. . . 

All this was very cheerful, but a new difficulty had 
arisen, and the Curator was distracted. An old member 
of the Common Room had just come to Oxford, who al¬ 
ways took pale Brandy and Soda at dinner, and there was 
nothing but brown in the Cellar. “What am I to do?” 
groaned the Curator. “It will take 8 days to get a Com¬ 
mittee-meeting to settle from what merchant to get 



A MISCELLANY 


IO64 

samples—4 days to get the samples—8 days more to get 
a meeting to select the brandy and fix the price to put on 
it—and 4 days to get it. That is over 3 weeks, and the 
poor old man only stays a fortnight!” Beads of perspira¬ 
tion trickled down his manly forehead. After some hours 
of anxious thought, he nerved himself for a truly desperate 
step: he ordered a bottle of pale brandy on his own responsi¬ 
bility! And forthwith came a letter from Tunbridge Wells. 
“What! you’re at it again, are you? . . . What’s the use of 
my anathematizing you twice a week by post, and doing 
my best to make your life a burden?” . . . 

I don’t quite know what became of that guilty Curator. 
I believe he fled to other climes; and they elected a new 
one: and Common Room was once more supposed to be 
governed on constitutional principles: and no hitch oc¬ 
curred—till the next time. 


THREE YEARS IN A CURATORSHIP 
BY ONE WHOM IT HAS TRIED 

(Four paragraphs of a report submitted by the author when 
he was Curator of the Common Room at Oxford.) 

PREFACE 

Long and painful experience has taught me one great 
principle in managing business for other people, viz., if 
you want to inspire confidence, give plenty of statistics. 
It does not matter that they should be accurate, or even 
intelligible, so long as there is enough of them. A curator 
who contents himself with simply doing the business of a 
Common Room, and who puts out no statistics, is sure 
to be distrusted. "He keeps us in the dark!” men will say. 
"He publishes no figures. What does it mean? Is he as- 



THREE YEARS IN A CURATORSHIP IO65 

sisting himself?” But, only circulate some abstruse tables 
of figures, particularly if printed in lines and columns, so 
that ordinary readers can make nothing of them, and all 
is changed at once. “Oh, go on, go on!” they cry, satiated 
with facts. “Manage things as you like! We trust you 
entirely!” 

Hence this pamphlet. 


1 

OF AIRS, GLARES, AND CHAIRS 

The Committee . .. appointed a year ago “to consider 
the whole question of lighting and ventilating”, have 
grappled with, and (it is hoped) pretty nearly solved, the 
two problems proposed to them—though but scantily 
supported by the sympathies of Common Room, who, 
though ready enough to ventilate our proposals as to 
“light” have altogether made light of our “ventilation”. 

The latter subject was discussed . . . and the plan 
adopted, of an oblique opening . . . pierced through the 
E. wall of the Common Room, with a valve inside, which 
might be opened or shut at will. . . . The valve has not 
only served the purpose for which it was designed—it has 
also furnished some most interesting illustrations of the 
tricks the human imagination can play, and the influence 
it has over physical sensations. The members of the C.R., 
who sit on the E. side of the room were at first terrified 
at the prospect of so much cold air beating down on their 
unsheltered heads. “It is hair we need—not air\” Thus 
they moaned in their anguish. But the strangest part of 
it was that it was usually when the valve was shut that 
they felt most keenly “the pelting of this pitiless storm”: 
when it was open, they made no complaint. The con¬ 
clusion seems to be, that the additional ventilation has 
not really produced any inconvenience, while it has con¬ 
ferred an undoubted benefit, by increasing the longevity 
of members of the C.R.—as is plain from the simple con- 



io66 


A MISCELLANY 


sideration that they are, all of them, six months older 
than they were when the change was made. 

The question of “light" has been very fully and fiercely 
debated by the Committee, and the suggestions were so 
many, and so contradictory, that the great mind of the 
Curator nearly gave way . . . for the table, it was agreed 
to request Mr. Thompson to select one of Hinck’s “Du¬ 
plex" lamps—it being understood that that kind com¬ 
bined high art and high illumination. Mr, Thompson 
kindly did so, and the result has been “a thing of beauty", 
which is also (probably) “a joy forever”, but it has not 
yet been tested quite long enough to prove this. . . . 

2 

DE RE NUMMARlA 

On this topic I am nothing if not tabular. . . . 

No financial statement can possibly be complete with¬ 
out a word or two about wine. For surely any Curator, 
worthy of the name, would be found, if tested by one 
Lee’s Reader, to possess a density varying directly, and 
a gravity varying inversely, as the potency of the Port— 
if tested anatomically by a second, to have the word 
“WINE” neatly emblazoned on his heart—and, if finally 
submitted to quantitative analysis by a third, to consist 
principally of C 4 H 6 0 2 . 

There is not, however, anything specially thrilling to 
say about this deeply-interesting subject. Water-drinkers 
will be pleased to hear that we have spent during the past 
year, with all the recklessness of several Grand Old Men, 
no less than £768 18s. gd. on wine, and that the result of 
this skilful financial operation has been a deficit on the 
year’s account, of £44 19s. gd. —while the wine-drinkers 
will be equally delighted to learn that the stock of pints 
of Y’quem has this year reached the proud position occu¬ 
pied, two years ago, by Madeira (B), and that we have 
enough in hand to last, at the present rate of consump¬ 
tion, for an infinite number of years. . . . 



THREE YEARS IN A CURATORSHIP 1067 

3 

DE MERI MERITIS 

... I have yet a word to say regarding one of our 
choicest wines, the “Mouton” Claret. On this subject we, 
the Wine Committee, have displayed a nervous trepida¬ 
tion, not to say a hysterical hypenssthesia —absolutely 
morbid. About a year ago a panic seized us. One or two 
bottles had turned out bad (“corked” or whatever it 
might have been): and suddenly the cry went up “All is 
lost!”: wild words, such as “It is past its prime!” “It is 
worth only three shillings a bottle!” hurled in the air: the 
very constitution of the Cellar was affected for a time: 
symptoms of diminished circulation and of slight con¬ 
sumption showed themselves. The Curator trembled, but 
would not quit the gory field in such frantic haste, or give 
the order... to empty the remaining bottles into Mer¬ 
cury—thereby certainly demoralizing, and probably de¬ 
stroying, its scaly inmates. . . . The devouring anxiety 
(members of the C.R. may have noticed its crushing effect 
on me, producing a lambent—not to say sheepish—style 
of conversation?) on the subject of “Mouton” is now 
wholly and at once removed. Those, who have not felt the 
anxiety, cannot fully realize the relief. The wretch, who 
groans with a bad tooth, is grateful to the dentist who 
extracts it for him: but were the same dentist to rush, 
pincers in hand, into the street, stop the first passer-by, 
and wrench from his jaw some perfectly sound tooth, 
similar expressions of gratitude could not reasonably be 
looked for. 


4 

DE LICL® STATISTIC® 

. . . Enough, enough! I have said my say, gentle reader! 
Turn the page, and revel, to your heart’s content, in 
[A Table of the Present Stock of Wine.] 



RESIDENT WOMEN-STUDENTS 


I n the bewildering multiplicity of petty side-issues, with 
which the question, of granting University Degrees to 
Women, has been overlaid, there is some danger that 
Members of Congregation may lose sight of the really 
important issues involved. 

The following four propositions should, I think, be kept 
steadily in view by all who wish to form an independent 
opinion as to the matter in dispute. 


(i) 

One of the chief functions, if not the chief function, of 
our University, is to prepare young Men—partly by 
teaching, partly by discipline, partly by the personal in¬ 
fluence of those who have charge of them, and partly by 
the influence they exercise on one another—for the busi¬ 
ness of Life. 

(This needs to be specially borne in mind in con¬ 
nection with the assumption, so constantly made in 
this controversy, that the sole meaning of the B.A. 
Degree is that it guarantees the possession of a large 
amount of knowledge.) 

Consequently, 


( 2 ) 

The first question to be asked, as to any Scheme pro¬ 
posed to our University, is, "How will it affect those for 
whose well-being we are responsible?” When we have 
assured ourselves that it will not exercise any harmful in¬ 
fluence on our own Students, then, and not till then, may 
we fairly proceed to consider how it will affect those for 
whose well-being we are not responsible. 



RESIDENT WOMEN-STUDENTS IO69 

(3) 

Any Scheme for the recognition of Women-Students— 
whether by a series of Certificates or a single Diploma— 
whereby those who have resided here will have an advan¬ 
tage, in the keen competition for educational posts, over 
those who have not, will most certainly end in making 
residence compulsory on all. Whether they wish it or not, 
whether they can afford it or not, Women-Students will 
find that they must reside, unless they are content to be 
hopelessly distanced in the race whose prize is “daily 
bread”. 

Consequently, 


(4) 

Any such Scheme is certain to produce an enormous in¬ 
flux of resident Women-Students. Considering that we 
have over 3000 young Men-Students, and that the num¬ 
ber of young Women, who are devoting themselves to 
study, is increasing “by leaps and bounds”, it may be 
confidently predicted that any such Scheme will bring to 
Oxford at least 3000 more young Women-Students. Such 
an immigration will of course produce a rapid increase in 
the size of Oxford, and will necessitate a large increase in 
our teaching-staff and in the number of our lecture-rooms. 

The main question before us is, “Will the mutual in¬ 
fluence, of two such sets of Students, residing in such close 
proximity, be for good or for evil?” 

Some Members of the Congregation will reply, “For 
good,” some, “For evil.” By all means let each form his 
own independent judgment, and give effect to it by his 
vote: but let him do it deliberately, and in the full light of 
facts. 

The late Dr. Liddon was strongly of opinion that such 
an influence would be for evil, at any rate for the young 
Women. I have myself heard him—no doubt many others 



A MISCELLANY 


1070 

have done the same—express, most warmly and earnestly, 
his fears as to the effect the new movement, for flooding 
Oxford with young Women-Students, would have on the 
young Women themselves. And I have no doubt that, 
were he yet among us, his silvery tones would have been 
heard in Congregation last Tuesday, deprecating the in¬ 
troduction, into our ancient University, of that social 
monster, the “He-Woman”. 

Surely the real “way-out”, from our present perplexity, 
is to be found in some such course as that advocated by 
Mr. Strachan-Davidson, that Oxford, Cambridge, and 
Dublin, should join in a petition to the Crown to grant 
a charter for a Women's University. 

Such a University would very soon attract to itself the 
greater portion of young Women-Students. It takes no 
great time to build Colleges; and we might confidently 
expect to see “New Oxford”, in the course of 20 or even 
of 10 years, rivaling Oxford, not only in numbers, but in 
attainments. At first, perhaps, they might need to bor¬ 
row some teachers from the older Universities; but they 
would soon be able to supply all, that would be needed, 
from among themselves; and Women-Lecturers and 
Women-Professors would arise, fully as good as any that 
the older Universities have ever produced. 

This proposal has been met by the plea that it is not 
what the Women themselves “desire”. Surely no weaker 
plea was ever urged in any controversy. Even men very 
often fail to “desire” what is, after all, the best thing for 
them to have. And those ancients, on whom the onerous 
task was laid, of weighing and, if reasonably possible, 
satisfying the claims of the horse-leech and her two 
daughters, had other things to consider than the mere 
shrillness of their outcries. 

Charles L. Dodgson 

CH.CH. 

Mar. yth, 1896 



SOME POPULAR FALLACIES 
ABOUT VIVISECTION 


At a time when this painful subject is engrossing so large 
a share of public attention, no apology, I trust, is needed 
for the following attempt to formulate and classify some 
of the many fallacies, as they seem to me, which I have 
met with in the writings of those who advocate the prac¬ 
tice. No greater service can be rendered to the cause of 
truth, in this fiercely contested field, than to reduce these 
shadowy, impalpable phantoms into definite forms, 
which can be seen, which can be grappled with, and 
which, when once fairly laid, we shall not need to exercise 
a second time. 

I begin with two contradictory propositions, which 
seem to constitute the two extremes, containing between 
them the golden mean of truth— 

1. That the infliction of pain on animals is a right of 
man, needing no justification. 

2 . That it is in no case justifiable. 

The first of these is assumed in practice by many who 
would hardly venture to outrage the common feelings of 
humanity by stating it in terms. All who recognize the 
difference of right and wrong must admit, if the question 
be closely pressed, that the infliction of pain is in some 
cases wrong. Those who deny it are not likely to be amen¬ 
able to argument. For what common ground have v/e? 
They must be restrained, like brute beasts, by physical 
force. 

The second has been assumed by an Association lately 
formed for the total suppression of Vivisection, in whose 
manifesto it is placed in the same category with Slavery, 
as being an absolute evil, with which no terms can be 
made. I think I may assume that the proposition most 
generally accepted is an intermediate one, namely, that the 
infliction of pain is in some cases justifiable, but not in all. 

1071 





A MISCELLANY 


1072 

3. That our right to inflict pain on animals is co-extensive 
with our right to kill, or even to exterminate a race (which 
prevents the existence of possible animals) all being alike 
infringements of their rights. 

This is one of the commonest and most misleading of 
all the fallacies. Mr.Freeman, in an article on Field Sports 
and Vivisection, which appeared in the Fortnightly Re¬ 
view for May, 1874, appears to countenance this when he 
classes death with pain together, as if they were admitted 
to be homogeneous. For example— 

“By cruelty then I understand, as I have understood 
throughout, not all infliction of death or suffering on man 
or beast, but their wrongful or needless infliction. . . . My 
positions then were two. First. . . that certain cases of 
the infliction of death or suffering on brute creatures may 
be blameworthy. The second was, that all infliction of 
death or suffering for the purpose of mere sport is one of 
those blameworthy cases.” 

But in justice to Mr. Freeman I ought also to quote the 
following sentence, in which he takes the opposite view: 
“I must in all cases draw a wide distinction between mere 
killing and torture.” 

In discussing the “rights of animals”, I think I may pass 
by, as needing no remark, the so-called right of a race of 
animals to be perpetuated, and the still more shadowy 
right of a non-existent animal to come into existence. The 
only question worth consideration is whether the killing 
of an animal is a real infringement of right. Once grant 
this, and a reductio ad absurdum is imminent, unless we 
are illogical enough to assign rights to animals in propor¬ 
tion to their size. Never may we destroy, for our conven¬ 
ience, some of a litter of puppies—or open a score of 
oysters when nineteen would have sufficed—or light a 
candle in a summer evening for mere pleasure, lest some 
hapless moth should rush to an untimely end! Nay, we 
must not even take a walk, with the certainty of crushing 
many an insect in our path, unless for really important 
business! Surely all this is childish. In the absolute hope- 



POPULAR FALLACIES ABOUT VIVISECTION IO73 

lessness of drawing a line anywhere, I conclude (and I be¬ 
lieve that many, on considering the point, will agree with 
me) that man has an absolute right to inflict death on 
animals, without assigning any reason, provided that it 
be a painless death, but that any infliction of pain needs 
its special justification. 

4. That man is infinitely more important than the lower 
animals, so that the infliction of animal suffering, however 
great, is justifiable if it prevent human suffering, however 
small. 

This fallacy can be assumed only when unexpressed. 
To put it into words is almost to refute it. Few, even in an 
age where selfishness has almost become a religion, dare 
openly avow a selfishness so hideous as this! While there 
are thousands, I believe, who would be ready to assure 
the vivisectors that, so far as their personal interests are 
concerned, they are ready to forego any prospect they 
may have of a diminution of pain, if it can only be secured 
by the infliction of so much pain on innocent creatures. 

But I have a more serious charge than that of selfish¬ 
ness to bring against the scientific men who make this as¬ 
sumption. They use it dishonestly, recognizing it when it 
tells in their favour, and ignoring it when it tells against 
them. For does it not pre-suppose the axiom that human 
and animal suffering differ in kind ? A strange assertion 
this, from the lips of people who tell us that man is twin- 
brother to the monkey! Let them be at least consistent, 
and when they have proved that the lessening of the 
human suffering is an end so great and glorious as to 
justify any means that will secure it, let them give the 
anthropomorphoid ape the benefit of the argument. Fur¬ 
ther than that I will not ask them to go, but will 
resign them in confidence to the guidance of an exorable 
logic. 

Had they only the candour and the courage to do it, I 
believe they would choose the other horn of the dilemma, 
and would reply, “Yes, man is in the same category as 
the brute; and just as we care not (you see it, so we can- 

2M L.C. 



A MISCELLANY 


IO74 

not deny it) how much pain we inflict on the one, so we 
care not, unless when deterred by legal penalties, how 
much we inflict on the other. The lust for scientific know¬ 
ledge is our real guiding principle. The lessening of 
human suffering is a mere dummy set up to amuse senti¬ 
mental dreamers. 

I now come to another class of fallacies—those in¬ 
volved in the comparison, so often made, between vivi¬ 
section and field-sports. If the theory, that the two are 
essentially similar, involved no worse consequence than 
that sports should be condemned by all who condemn 
vivisection, I should be by no means anxious to refute it. 
Unfortunately the other consequence is just as logical, 
and just as likely, that vivisection should be approved of 
by all who approve of sport. 

The comparison rests on the assumption that the main 
evil laid to the charge of vivisection is the pain inflicted 
on the animal. This assumption I propose to deal with, 
further on, as a fallacy: at present I will admit it for the 
sake of argument, hoping to show, that, even on this 
hypothesis, the vivisectors have a very poor case. In mak¬ 
ing this comparison their first claim is— 

5. That it is fair to compare aggregates of pain. 

“The aggregate amount of wrong”—I quote from an 
article in the Pall Mall Gazette for February 13th— 
"which is perpetrated against animals by sportsmen in a 
single year probably exceeds that which some of them 
endure from vivisectors in half a century.” The best refu¬ 
tation of this fallacy would seem to be to trace it to its 
logical conclusion—that a very large number of trivial 
wrongs are equal to one great one. For instance, that a 
man, who by selling adulterated bread inflicts a minute 
injury on the health of some thousands of persons, com¬ 
mits a crime equal to one murder. Once grasp this reductio 
ad absurdum, and you will be ready to allow that the only 
fair comparison is between individual and individual. 

Supposing the vivisectors are forced to abandon this 
position, they may then fall back on the next parallel— 



POPULAR FALLACIES ABOUT VIVISECTION IO75 

6 . That the pain inflicted on an individual animal in 
vivisection is not greater than in sport. 

I am no sportsman, and so have no right to dogmatize, 
but I am tolerably sure that all sportsmen will agree with 
me that this is untrue of shooting, in which, whenever 
the animal is killed at once, it is probably as painless a 
form of death as could be devised; while the sufferings of 
one that escapes wounded ought to be laid to the charge 
of unskilful sport, not of sport in the abstract. Probably 
much of the same might be said of fishing: for other forms 
of sport, and especially for hunting, I have no defence to 
offer, believing that they involve very great cruelty. 

Even if the last two fallacies were granted to advocates 
of vivisection, their use in the argument must depend on 
the following proposition being true: 

7. That the evil charged against vivisection consists 
chiefly ifi the pain inflicted on the animal. 

I maintain, on the contrary, that it consists chiefly in 
the effect produced on the operator. To use the words of 
Mr. Freeman, in the article already quoted, “the question 
is not as to the aggregate amount of suffering inflicted, 
but as to the moral character of the acts by which the suf¬ 
fering is inflicted.” We see this most clearly, when we 
shift our view from the act itself to its remoter conse¬ 
quences. The hapless animal suffers, dies, “and there an 
end”: but the man whose sympathies have been deadened, 
and whose selfishness has been fostered, by the contempla¬ 
tion of pain deliberately inflicted, may be the parent of 
others equally brutalized, and so bequeath a curse to 
future ages. And even if we limit our view to the present 
time, who can doubt that the degradation of a soul is a 
greater evil than the suffering of bodily frame? Even if 
driven to admit this, the advocates of the practice may 
still assert— 

8. That vivisection has no demoralizing effect on the 
character of the operator. 

“Look at our surgeons!” they may exclaim. “Are they 
a demoralized or a brutalized class? Yet you must admit, 



A MISCELLANY 


IO76 

that in the operations they have to perform, they are per¬ 
petually contemplating pain—aye, and pain deliberately 
inflicted by their own hands.” The analogy is not a fair 
one; since the immediate motive—of saving the life, or 
diminishing the sufferings, of the person operated on—is 
a counteracting influence in surgery, to which vivisection, 
with its shadowy hope of some day relieving the suffer¬ 
ings of some human being yet unborn, has nothing par¬ 
allel to offer. This, however, is a question to be decided 
by evidence, not by argument. History furnishes us with 
too many examples of the degradation of character pro¬ 
duced by the deliberate pitiless contemplation of suffer¬ 
ing. The effect of the national bull-fights on the Spanish 
character is a case in point. But we need not go to Spain 
for evidence: the following extract from the Echo, quoted 
in the Spectator for March 20th, will be enough to 
enable the reader to judge for himself what sort of 
effect this practice is likely to have on the minds of the 
students— 

“But if yet more be necessary to satisfy the public 
minds on this latter point” (the effect on the operators), 
“the testimony of an English physiologist, known to the 
writer, may be useful in conclusion. He was present some 
time past at a lecture, in the course of which demonstra¬ 
tions were made on living dogs. When the unfortunate 
creatures cried and moaned under the operation, many of 
the students actually mimicked their cries in derision! The 
gentleman who related this occurrence adds that the 
spectacle of the writhing animals and the fiendish be¬ 
haviour of the audience so sickened him, that he could 
not wait for the conclusion of the lecture, but took his 
departure in disgust.” 

It is a humiliating but an undeniable truth, that man 
has something of the wild beast in him, that a thirst for 
blood can be aroused in him by witnessing a scene of car¬ 
nage, and that the infliction of torture, when the first in¬ 
stincts of horror have been deadened by the familiarity 
may become, first, a matter of indifference, then a subject 



POPULAR FALLACIES ABOUT VIVISECTION 10 JJ 

of morbid interest, then a positive pleasure, and then a 
ghastly and ferocious delight. 

Here again, however, the analogy of sport is of some 
service to the vivisector, and he may plead that the in¬ 
fluence we dread is already at work among our sportsmen. 
This I will now consider. 

9. That vivisection does not demoralize the character more 
than sport. 

The opponent's case would not, I think, suffer much 
even if this were admitted; but I am inclined to demur to 
to it as a universal truth. We must remember that much 
of the excitement and interest of sport depends on causes 
entirely unconnected with the infliction of pain, which is 
rather ignored than deliberately contemplated; whereas 
in vivisection the painful effects constitute in many cases 
a part, in some cases the whole, of the interest felt by the 
spectator. And all they tell us of the highly developed in¬ 
tellect of the anatomical student, with which they con¬ 
trast so contemptuously the low animal instincts of the 
fox-hunter, is but another argument against themselves; 
for surely the nobler the being we degrade, the greater is 
the injury we inflict on society. Cofruptio optimi pessima. 

“But all this ignores the motive of the action,” cry the 
vivisectors. “What is it in sport? Mere pleasure. In this 
matter we hold an impregnable position.” Let us see. 

10. That, while the motive in sport is essentially selfish, 
in vivisection it is essentially unselfish. 

It is my conviction that the non-scientific world is far 
too ready to attribute to the advocates of science all the 
virtues they are so ready to claim; and when they put 
forward their favourite ad captandum argument that their 
labours are undergone for one pure motive—the good of 
humanity—society is far too ready to exclaim, with Mrs. 
Varden, "Here is a meek, righteous, thorough-going 
Christian, who, having dropped a pinch of salt on the 
tails of'all the cardinal virtues, and caught them every 
one, makes light of their possession, and pants for more 
morality!” In other words, society is far too ready to ac- 



A MISCELLANY 


IO78 

cept the picture of the pale, worn devotee of science giv¬ 
ing his days and nights to irksome and thankless toil, 
spurred on by no other motive than a boundless philan¬ 
thropy. As one who has himself devoted much time and 
labour to scientific investigations, I desire to offer the 
strongest possible protest against this falsely coloured 
picture. I believe that any branch of science, when taken 
up by one who has a natural turn for it, will soon become 
as fascinating as sport to the most ardent sportsman, or 
as any form of pleasure to the most refined sensualist. 
The claim that hard work, or the endurance of privation, 
proves the existence of an unselfish motive, is simply 
monstrous. Grant to me that the miser is proved unselfish 
when he stints himself of food and sleep to add one more 
piece of gold to his secret hoard, that the place-hunter is 
proved unselfish when he toils through long years to reach 
the goal of his ambition, and I will grant to you that the 
laborious pursuit of science is proof positive of an unselfish 
motive. Of course I do not assert, of even a single scien¬ 
tific student, that his real motive is merely that craving 
for more knowledge, whether useful or useless, which is as 
natural an appetite as the craving for novelty or any other 
form of excitement. I only say that the lower motive 
would account for the observed conduct quite as well as 
the higher. 

Yet, after all, the whole argument, deduced from a 
comparison of vivisection with sport, rests on the follow¬ 
ing proposition, which I claim to class as a fallacy— 

11. That toleration of one form of an evil necessitates the 
toleration of all others. 

Grant this, and you simply paralyze all conceivable 
efforts at reformation. How can we talk of putting down 
cruelty to animals when drunkenness is rampant in the 
land? You would propose, then, to legislate in the inter¬ 
ests of sobriety? Shame on you! Look at the unseaworthy 
ships in which our gallant sailors are risking their lives! 
What! Organize a crusade against dishonest shipowners, 
while our streets swarm with a population growing up in 



POPULAR FALLACIES ABOUT VIVISECTION IO79 

heathen ignorance! We can but reply, non omnia possu- 
mus omnes. And surely the man who sees his way to 
diminish in any degree a single one of the myriad evils 
around him, may well lay to heart the saying of a wise 
man of old, “Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it 
with thy might.” 

The last parallel to which the advocates of vivisection 
may be expected to retreat, supposing all these positions 
to be found untenable, is the assertion— 

12. That legislation would only increase the evil . 

The plea, if I understand it aright, amounts to this— 
that legislation would probably encourage many to go 
beyond the limit with which at present they are content, 
as soon as they found that a legal limit had been fixed 
beyond their own. Granting this to be the tendency of 
human nature, what is the remedy usually adopted in 
other cases? A stricter limit, or the abandonment of all 
limits? Suppose a case—that in a certain town it were 
proposed to close all taverns at midnight, and that the 
opponents of the measure urged, “At present some close 
at eleven—a most desirable hour: if you pass this law, all 
will keep open till midnight.” What would' the answer 
be? “Then let us do nothing,” or, “Then let us fix eleven, 
instead of twelve, as our limit?” Surely this does not need 
many words: the principle of doing evil that good may 
come is not likely to find many defenders, even in this 
modern disguise of forbearing to do good lest evil should 
come. We may safely take our stand on the principle of 
doing the duty which we see before us: secondary con¬ 
sequences are at once out of our control and beyond our 
calculation. 

Let us now collect into one paragraph the contradic¬ 
tions of some of these fallacies (which I have here rather 
attempted to formulate and classify than to refute, or even 
fully discuss), and so exhibit in one view the case of the 
opponents of vivisection. It is briefly this— 

That while we do not deny the absolute right of man 
to end the lives of the lower animals by a painless death, 



io8o 


A MISCELLANY 


we require good and sufficient cause for the infliction of 
pain. 

That the prevention of suffering to a human being does 
not justify the infliction of a greater amount of suffering 
on an animal. 

That the chief evil of the practice of vivisection con¬ 
sists in its effect on the moral character of the operator; 
and that this effect is distinctly demoralizing and 
brutalizing. 

That hard work and endurance of privations are no 
proof of an unselfish motive. 

That the toleration of one form of an evil is no excuse 
for tolerating another. 

Lastly, that the risk of legislation increasing the evil is 
not enough to make all legislation undesirable. 

We have now, I think, seen good reasons to suspect 
that the principle of selfishness lies at the root of this 
accursed practice. That the same principle is probably 
the cause of the indifference with which its growth among 
us is regarded, is not perhaps so obvious. Yet I believe 
this indifference to be based on a tacit assumption, which 
I propose to notice as the last of this long catalogue of 
fallacies— 

13. That the practice of vivisection will never be extended 
so as to include human subjects. 

That is, in other words, that while science arrogates to 
herself the right of torturing at her pleasure the whole 
sentient creation up to man himself, some inscrutable 
boundary line is there drawn, over which she will never 
venture to pass. "Let the galled jade wince, our withers 
are unwrung.'’ 

Not improbably, when that stately Levite of old was 
pacing with dainty step the road that led from Jerusalem 
to Jericho, "bemused with thinking of tithe-concerns,” 
and doing his best to look unconscious of the prostrate 
form on the other side of the way, if it could have whis¬ 
pered in his ear, " Your turn comes next to fall among the 
thieves!” some sudden thrill of pity might have been 



POPULAR FALLACIES ABOUT VIVISECTION Io8l 

aroused in him: he might even, at the risk of soiling those 
rich robes, have joined the Samaritan in his humane task 
of tending the wounded man. And surely the easy-going 
Levites of our own time would take an altogether new 
interest in this matter, could they only realize the possible 
advent of a day when anatomy shall claim as legitimate 
subjects for experiment, first, our condemned criminals— 
next, perhaps, the inmates of our refuges for incurables— 
then the hopeless lunatic, the pauper hospital-patient, 
and generally “him that hath no helper”—a day when 
successive generations of students, trained from their 
earliest years to the repression of all human sympathies, 
shall have developed a new and more hideous Franken¬ 
stein—a soulless being to whom science shall be all in all. 

Homo sum! Quidvis humanum non a me alienum 
puto. 1 

And when that day shall come, 0 my brother-man, 
you who claim for yourself and for me so proud an an¬ 
cestry—tracing our pedigree through the anthropomor- 
phoid ape up to the primeval zoophyte—what potent 
charm have you in store to win exemption from the com¬ 
mon doom? Will you represent to that grim spectre, as he 
gloats over you, scalpel in hand, the inalienable rights of 
man? He will tell you that this is merely a question of 
relative expediency—that, with so feeble a physique as 
yours, you have only to be thankful that natural selection 
has spared you so long. Will you reproach him with the 
needless torture he proposes to inflict upon you? He will 
smilingly assure you that the hypercesthesia, which he 
hopes to induce, is in itself a most interesting phenome- 

1 Quotation from letter, dated July 18, 1924, from F. Madan, of 
Oxford to M. L. Parrish, of Pine Valley, New Jersey. 

Dear Mr. Parrish, 

I congratulate you on acquiring the "Popular Fallacies about 
Vivisection”. Mr. Williams himself has the only other copy. 

I suppose it has Mr. Dodgson’s misquotation of Terence in it: 
"Homo sum! Quidvis humanum non a me alienum puto.” That is 
bad all round. It doesn’t even scan. Really mathematicians should 
let Latin alone. It should be of course : 

“Homo sum: humani nihil a me alienum puto.” 



A MISCELLANY 


1082 

non, deserving much patient study. Will you then, 
gathering up all your strength for one last desperate 
appeal, plead with him as with a fellow-man, and with an 
agonized cry for "Mercy!” seek to rouse some dormant 
spark of pity in that icy breast? Ask it rather of the 
nether mill-stone. 


LAWN TENNIS TOURNAMENTS 

The True Method of Assigning Prizes with a Proof 
of the Fallacy of the Present Method 

I. INTRODUCTORY 

At a Lawn Tennis Tournament, where I chanced, some 
while ago, to be a spectator, the present method of assign¬ 
ing prizes was brought to my notice by the lamentations 
of one of the Players, who had been beaten (and had thus 
lost all chance of a prize) early in the contest, and who 
had had the mortification of seeing the 2nd prize carried 
off by a Player whom he knew to be quite inferior to 
himself. The results of the investigations, which I was 
led to make, I propose to lay before the reader under the 
following four headings— 

(a) A proof that the present method of assigning prizes 

is, except in the case of the first prize, entirely 
unmeaning. 

(b) A proof that the present method of scoring in 

matches is constantly liable to lead to unjust 
results. 

(c) A system of rules for conducting Tournaments, 

which, while requiring even less time than the 
present system, shall secure equitable results. 

(d) An equitable system for scoring in matches. 



LAWN TENNIS TOURNAMENTS IO83 

2. A proof that the present method of assigning prizes is, 
except in the case of the first prize, entirely unmeaning. 

Let us take, as an example of the present method, a 
Tournament of 32 competitors with 4 prizes. 

On the 1st day, these contend in 16 pairs: on the 2nd 
day, the 16 Winners contend in 8 pairs, the Losers being 
excluded from further competition: on the 3rd day, the 8 
Winners contend in 4 pairs: on the 4th day, the 4 Winners 
(who are now known to be the 4 Prize-Men) contend in 2 
pairs: and on the 5th day, the 2 Winners contend together 
to decide which is to take the 1st prize and which the 2nd 
—the two Losers having no further contest, as the 3rd 
and 4th prizes are of equal value. 

Now, if we divide the list of competitors, arranged in 
the order in which they are paired, into 4 sections, we may 
see that all that this method really does is to ascertain 
who is best in each section, then who is best in each half 
of the list, and then who is best of all. The best of all (and 
this is the only equitable result arrived at) wins the 1st 
prize: the best in the other half of the list wins the 2nd: 
and the best men in the two sections not yet represented 
by a champion win the other two prizes. If the Players 
had chanced to be paired in the order of merit, the 17th 
best Player would necessarily carry off the 2nd prize, and 
the 9th and 25th best the 3rd and 4th! This of course is an 
extreme case: but anything within these limits is possible: 
e.g. any competitor, from the 3rd best to the 17th best, 
may, by the mere accidental arrangement of pairs, and by 
no means as a result of his own skill, carry off the 2nd 
prize. As a mathematical fact, the chance that the 2nd 
best Player will get the prize he deserves is only -g-fsts; 
while the chance that the best 4 shall get their proper 
prizes is so small, that the odds are 12 to 1 against its 
happening! 

If any one thinks that, after all, we are merely intro¬ 
ducing another element of chance into the game, and that 
no one can fairly object to that, let him try the experiment 
in a rifle competition. Let him interpose when the man, 



A MISCELLANY 


I084 

who has made the 2nd best score, is going to receive his 
prize, and propose that he shall draw a counter from a 
bag containing 16 white and 15 black, and only have his 
prize in case he draw a white one: and let him observe 
the expression of that rifleman’s face. 

3. A proof that the present method of scoring in matches 
is constantly liable to lead to unjust results. 

To prove this, let us suppose a “set” to mean “the best 
of 11 games”, and a “match” “the best of 5 sets”: i.e. “he, 
who first wins 6 games, wins a set; he, who first wins 3 
sets, wins a match.” 

Suppose A and B to play the following 50 games (“A2” 
means A wins 2 games, and so on)— 

B2A5B4 1 A6 | B3A5B2A* j B*A2B4A3B I B2A5B3A. 

Here A wins 28 games to 22, and also wins the match. 

But, by simply transposing A*, B*, we get 

B2A5B4 1 A6 | B3A5B3 | A3B4A3 | B3A5B3, 

the last game of the original series not being played. 

Here A still wins 27 games to 22: yet he loses the 
match! 

4. A system of rules for conducting Tournaments, which 
while requiring even less time than the present system, shall 
secure equitable results. 

The method for conducting Tournaments, which I have 
to propose, involves two departures from the present 
method. First, I propose to make a “match” last only 
half a day (the necessary reduction in the number of 
games I will discuss in section 5): secondly, I propose to 
give only 3 prizes. The rules for a Tournament of 32 
Players would be as follows— 

(a) The Tournament begins in the middle of the 1st 
day, so that there is only one contest that day—the 32 
Players being arranged in 16 pairs. 

(b) A list is kept, and against each name is entered, at 
the end of each contest, the name of any one who has 
been superior to him—whether by actually beating him, 
or by beating some one who has done so (thus, if A beats 
B, and B beats C, A and B are both “superiors” of C). So 



LAWN TENNIS TOURNAMENTS IO85 

soon as any name has 3 “superiors" entered against it, it 
is struck out of the list. 

(c) For the 2nd day (morning) the 16 unbeaten men 
are paired together, and similarly the 16 with 1 superior 
(the Losers in these last-named pairs will now have 3 
superiors each, and will therefore be struck off the list). In 
all other contests they are paired in the same way; first 
pairing the unbeaten, then those with 1 superior, and so 
on, and avoiding, as far as possible, pairing two Players 
who have a common superior. 

(1 d ) By the middle of the 3rd day the unbeaten are re¬ 
duced to two, one of whom is certainly “First-prize-man". 
These two do not contend in the afternoon contest that 
day, but have a whole-day match on the 4th day—the 
other Players meanwhile continuing the usual half-day 
matches. 

( e ) By the end of the 4th day, the “First-prize-man" is 
known (by the very same process of elimination used in 
the existing method): and the remaining Players are 
paired by the same rules as before, for the 2 contests on 
the 5th day. If, in section [a), the Tournament was begun 
in the morning, the two men named in section ( d ) being 
still allowed a whole-day match, nothing would be gained 
in time, as the Tournament would take 4! days, while 
much would be lost in interest, as the first prize would be 
settled in 3 days. 

To illustrate these rules, I will give the complete his¬ 
tory of a Tournament of 32 competitors, with 3 prizes. If 
the reader will draw out the following Tables, in blank, 
and fill them up for himself, referring, if necessary, to the 
accompanying directions, he will easily understand the 
workings of the system. 

Let the Players be arranged alphabetically, and let the 
relative skill, with which they play in this Tournament, 
be— 

ABCDEFGHJ 
19 22 14 32 16 25 15 28 3 



1086 



A 

MISCELLANY 




K 

L 

M 

N 

P 

Q 

R 

S 

T 

10 

8 

1 

29 

4 

12 

2 

17 

23 

U 

V 

W 

X 

Y 

z 

a 

b 

c 

26 

11 

20 

3 i 

13 

18 

6 

24 

9 

d 

e 

f 

g 

h 





21 

30 

5 

7 

27 





These numbers ( 

((j 

meaning 

"best”) 

will 

enable the 


reader to name the victor in any contest: but of course 
they are not supposed to be known to the Tournament- 
Committee, who have nothing to guide them but the re¬ 
sults of actual contests. In the following Tables, " 1 (e)” 
means "first day, evening”, and so on: also a Player, who 
is virtually proved superior to another, is entered thus 
"(A)”. The victor in each contest is marked *: and o 
means ‘‘struck out”. 

Directions for filling in the Tables— 

Tab. I. Day I (e). The names are written out alpha¬ 
betically, and paired as they stand. The victors are 
marked with asterisks. 

Tab. II. Day I (e). As B has been beaten by A, A is 
entered as his "superior”; C as D’s superior; and so on. 

Tab. I. Day II (m). We first pair together all the un¬ 
beaten, A,C,E,G, &c. Then those who have one superior, 
B,D,F,H, &c. 

Tab. II (m). We first enter the actual superiors, C,G, 
&c. Then, since A has a superior C, and B has a superior 
A, we see that B has a virtual superior C; and so on. We 
then see that D has 3 superiors, and must be struck out; 
and so with H, &c. 

Tab. I. Day II (e). We first pair together all the un¬ 
beaten, C,G, &c. Then all with one superior, A,E, &c.; but 
when we come to J,L, we find we have a common superior; 
so we pair J with P, and L with Q. This series ends with 
an odd one, g, who must therefore be paired with the 
first of those who have two superiors each, F,T, &c. 



LAWN TENNIS TOURNAMENTS 1087 

Tab. I. Day III (m). Here, in pairing those with one 
superior, we again end with an odd one, g, who must 
therefore be paired with the first of those with two 
superiors, viz. T. We end with an “odd man”, c. 

Tab. II. Day III (m). The unbeaten are now reduced to 
one pair, M,f, who therefore will do nothing this after¬ 
noon, but will have a whole-day contest to-morrow. 

Tab. I. Day III (e). Those who have one superior are 
C,J,L,R, all with a common superior M; and then V,a,g, 
all with a common superior f. We therefore pair C with V, 
and so on, leaving an odd one R, who must be paired with 
the only one who has two superiors, viz. c. 

Tab. II. Day III (e). Enter as usual. 

Tab. I. Day IV (m). We pair the 2 unbeaten, M,f, for 
their whole-day contest. Then those with one superior. 

Tab. II. Day IV (m). M and f are still contending. V 
and g are struck out. 

Tab. I. Day IV (e). J and R must be paired together, 
though they have a common superior. 

Tab. I. Day IV (e). M is First-prize-man. 

Tab. I. Day V (m). R and f must be paired together, 
though they have a common superior. J is “odd man”. 

Tab. II. Day V (m). R is now the only man with one 
superior, and is therefore Second-prize-man. 

Tab. I. Day V (e). J and f contend for the Third prize. 

If this Tournament were fought by the present method, 
the 4 Prize men would be C,M,V,f: f would get the 2nd 
prize, and C and V the 3rd and 4th: i.e. the 5th best man 
would get the 2nd prize, and the 14th and nth best the 
other two. 

5. An equitable system for scoring in matches. 

In order to make “matches” more equitable, I propose 
to abolish “sets”, and make a “match” consist of 
“games”. Thus, instead of “best of 11 games = set; best of 
5 sets = match” (i.e. he who first wins 6 games wins a set; 
he who first wins 3 sets wins a match), where a player may 
win with as few as 18 games, and must win with 28, I 
would substitute “he who first wins 28 games, or who 



TABLE I. (Pairs.) 














TABLE II. (Superiors.) 


A 
B 
C 

n c 



u v 

V ... 

w ... 
X w 



B(A)0 

G 

(G) 

F(E)0 

M 

L(M)0 


Q(R)G 

R 


V 
(V) 

T(S)0 

Y 

Z(Y)0 


d(c)0 

a 

(a) 

h(g)Q 


A(C)G 

TO 


J(M)G 

L(M)G 

M 


S(V)G 


III. (Ill) 

(e) 

IV. (m) 

(e) 

V. (m) 

(e) 

J(M)G 






M 

V(f)G 





L(M) O 


... 

R 


Pr. Ill 


g(f)Q 


Pr. I. 



R(f)G 

g G 


... 


Pr. II. 


£ 


J(M)G 




a(f)G 

J{M)G 





. . . 

RO 

R(M) O 

M 

R 

JO 












A MISCELLANY 


1090 

gets 18 games ahead, wins the match". I therefore pro¬ 
pose as follows: "For a whole-day, he who first wins 28 
games, or who gets 18 ahead, wins the match: for a half¬ 
day, he who first wins 14 games, or who gets 9 ahead, 
wins the match.” 

6. C <including remarks. 

Let it not be supposed that, in thus proposing to make 
these Tournaments a game of pure skill (like chess) in¬ 
stead of a game of mixed skill and chance (like whist), I 
am altogether eliminating the element of luck, and mak¬ 
ing it possible to predict the prize-winners, so that no one 
else would care to enter. The "chances of the board” 
would still exist in full force: it would not at all follow, 
because a Player was reputed best, that he was certain of 
the 1st prize: a thousand accidents might occur to pre¬ 
vent his playing best: the 4th best, 5th best, or even a 
worst Player, need not despair of winning even the 1st 
prize. 

Nor, again, let it be supposed that the present system, 
which allows an inferior player a chance of the 2nd prize, 
even though he fails to play above his reputation, is more 
attractive than one which, in such a case, gives him no 
hope. Let us compare the two systems, as to the attrac¬ 
tions they hold out to (say) the 5th best Player in a Tour¬ 
nament of 32, with 3 prizes. The present system says, “If 
you play up to your reputation, your chance of a prize is 
about |th; and even if, by great luck and painstaking, 
you play 2nd or 3rd best, it never rises above a half.” My 
system says, “It is admitted that, if you only play up to 
your reputation, you will get nothing: but, if you play 2nd 
or 3rd best, you are certain of the proper prize.” Thus, 
the one system offers a chance of Jth, where the other 
offers nothing; and a chance of a half, where the other 
offers certainty, I am inclined to think the second the 
more attractive of the two. 

If, however, it be thought that, under the proposed 
system, the very inferior Players would feel so hopeless of 
a prize that they would not enter a Tournament, this can 



WISE WORDS ABOUT LETTER WRITING IOgi 

easily be remedied by a process of handicapping, as is 
usual in races, &c. This would give every one a reason¬ 
able hope of a prize, and therefore a sufficient motive for 
entering. 

The proposed form of Tournament, though lasting a 
shorter time than the present one, has a great many more 
contests going on at once, and consequently furnishes the 
spectacle-loving public with a great deal more to look at. 


EIGHT OR NINE WISE WORDS 
ABOUT LETTER WRITING 

I. ON STAMP-CASES 

Some American writer has said “the snakes in this dis¬ 
trict may be divided into one species—the venomous”. 
The same principle applies here. Postage-Stamp-Cases 
may be divided into one species, the “Wonderland”. Imi¬ 
tations of it will soon appear, no doubt: but they cannot 
include the two Pictorial Surprises, which are copyright. 

You don’t see why I call them “Surprises”? Well, take 
the Case in your left-hand, and regard it attentively. You 
see Alice nursing the Duchess's Baby? (An entirely new 
combination, by the way: It doesn’t occur in the book.) 
Now, with your right thumb and forefinger, lay hold of 
the little book, and suddenly pull it out. The Baby has 
turned into a Pig! If that doesn’t surprise you, why, I 
suppose you wouldn’t be surprised if your own Mother- 
in-law suddenly turned into a Gyroscope! 

This Case is not intended to carry about in your pocket. 
Far from it. People seldom want any other Stamps, on 
an emergency, than Penny-Stamps for Letters, Sixpenny- 
Stamps for Telegrams, and a bit of Stamp-edging for cut 
fingers (it makes capital sticking-plaster, and will stand 
three or four washings, cautiously conducted): and all 



A MISCELLANY 


IO92 

these are easily carried in a purse or pocket-book. No, 
this is meant to haunt your envelope-case, or wherever 
you keep your writing-materials. What made me invent 
it was the constantly wanting Stamps of other values, for 
foreign Letters, Parcel Post, etc., and finding it very 
bothersome to get at the kind I wanted in a hurry. Since I 
have possessed a “Wonderland Stamp-Case”, life has 
been bright and peaceful, and I have used no other. I 
believe the Queen’s laundress uses no other. 

Each of the pockets will hold 6 stamps, comfortably. I 
would recommend you to arrange the 6, before putting 
them in, something like a bouquet, making them lean to 
the right and to the left alternately: thus there will 
always be a free corner to get hold of, so as to take them 
out, quickly and easily, one by one: otherwise you will 
find them apt to come out two or three at a time. 

According to my experience, the 5 d., 9 d., and is. 
Stamps are hardly ever wanted, though I have constantly 
to replenish all the other pockets. If your experience 
agrees with mine, you may find it convenient to keep only 
a couple (say) of each of these 3 kinds, in the is. pocket, 
and to fill the other 2 pockets with extra id. stamps. 

2 . HOW TO BEGIN A LETTER 

If the Letter is to be in answer to another, begin by 
getting out that other letter and reading it through, in 
order to refresh your memory, as to what it is you have 
to answer, and as to your correspondent’s present address 
(otherwise you will be sending your letter to his regular 
address in London, though he has been careful in writing 
to give you his Torquay address in full). 

Next, Address and Stamp the Envelope. “What! Be¬ 
fore writing the Letterl” Most certainly. And I’ll tell you 
what will happen if you-don’t. You will go on writing till 
the last moment, and, just in the middle of the last 
sentence, you will become aware that “time’s up!” Then 
comes the hurried wind-up—the wildly-scrawled signa- 



WISE WORDS ABOUT LETTER WRITING IO93 

ture—the hastily-fastened envelope, which comes open in 
the post—the address, a mere hieroglyphic—the horrible 
discovery that you’ve forgotten to replenish your Stamp- 
Case—the frantic appeal, to every one in the house, to 
lend you a Stamp—the headlong rush to the Post Office, 
arriving, hot and gasping, just after the box has closed—• 
and finally, a week afterwards, the return of the Letter, 
from the Dead-Letter Office, marked “address illegible’’! 

Next, put your own address, in full, at the top of the 
note-sheet. It is an aggravating thing—I speak from 
bitter experience—when a friend, staying at some new 
address, heads his letter “Dover”, simply, assuming that 
you can get the rest of the address from his previous 
letter, which perhaps you have destroyed. 

Next, put the date in full. It is another aggravating 
thing, when you wish, years afterwards, to arrange a 
series of letters, to find them dated “Feb. 17”, “Aug. 2”, 
without any year to guide you as to which comes first. 
And never, never, dear Madam (N.B. this remark is 
addressed to ladies only, no man would ever do such a 
thing), put “Wednesday”, simply, as the date! 

“That way madness lies.” 

3. HOW TO GO ON WITH A LETTER 

Here is a golden Rule to begin with. Write legibly. 
The average temper of the human race would be per¬ 
ceptibly sweetened, if everybody obeyed this Rule! A 
great deal of the bad writing in the world comes simply 
from writing too quickly. Of course you reply, “I do it to 
save time.” A very good object, no doubt: but what right 
have you to do it at your friend’s expense? Isn’t his time 
as valuable as yours? Years ago, I used to receive letters 
from a friend—and very interesting letters too—written 
in one of the most atrocious hands ever invented. It 
generally took me about a week to read one of his letters. 
I used to carry it about in my pocket, and take it out at 
leisure times, to puzzle over the riddles which composed 



A MISCELLANY 


IO94 

it—holding it in different positions, and at different dis¬ 
tances, till at last the meaning of some hopeless scrawl 
would flash upon me, when I at once wrote down the 
English under it; and, when several had been thus 
guessed, the context would help with the others, till at 
last the whole series of hieroglyphics was deciphered. If 
all one’s friends wrote like that, Life would be entirely 
spent in reading their letters! 

This Rule applies, specially, to names of people or 
places—and most specially to foreign names. I got a letter 
once, containing some Russian names, written in the 
same hasty scramble in which people often write "yours 
sincerely”. The context, of course, didn’t help in the least: 
and one spelling was just as likely as another, so far as I 
knew: It was necessary to write and tell my friend that 
I couldn’t read any of them! 

My second Rule is, don’t fill more than a page and a 
half with apologies for not having written sooner! 

The best subject, to begin with, is your friend’s last 
letter. Write with the letter open before you. Answer his 
questions, and make any remarks his letter suggests. Then 
go on to what you want to say yourself. This arrangement 
is more courteous, and pleasanter for the reader, than 
to fill the letter with your own invaluable remarks, and 
then hastily answer your friend’s questions in a postscript. 
Your friend is much more likely to enjoy your wit, after 
his own anxiety for information has been satisfied. 

In referring to anything your friend has said in his 
letter, it is best to quote the exact words, and not to give 
a summary of them in your words. A’s impression, of 
what B has said, expressed in A’s words, will never con¬ 
vey to B the meaning of his own words. 

This is specially necessary when some point has arisen 
as to which the two correspondents do not quite agree. 
There ought to be no opening for such writing as “You 
are quite mistaken in thinking I said so-and-so. It was 
not in the least my meaning, &c., &c.”, which tends to 
make a correspondence last for a life-time. 



WISE WORDS ABOUT LETTER WRITING IO95 

A few more Rules may fitly be given here, for corres¬ 
pondence that has unfortunately become controversial. 

One is, don’t repeat yourself. When once you have said 
your say, fully and clearly, on a certain point, and have 
failed to convince your friend, drop that subject: to repeat 
your arguments, all over again, will simply lead to his 
doing the same; and so you will go on, like a Circulating 
Decimal. Did you ever know a Circulating Decimal come 
to an end? 

Another Rule is, when you have written a letter that 
you feel may possibly irritate your friend, however neces¬ 
sary you may have felt it to so express yourself, put it 
aside till the next day. Then read it over again, and fancy 
it addressed to yourself. This will often lead to your writ¬ 
ing it all over again, taking out a lot of the vinegar and 
pepper, and putting in honey instead, and thus making 
a much more palatable dish of it! If, when you have done 
your best to write inoffensively, you still feel that it will 
probably lead to further controversy, keep a copy of it. 
There is very little use, months afterwards, in pleading 
"I am almost sure I never expressed myself as you say: 
to the best of my recollection I said so-and-so”. Far better 
to be able to write “I did not express myself so: these are 
the words I used”. 

My fifth Rule is, if your friend makes a severe remark, 
either leave it unnoticed, or make your reply distinctly 
less severe: and if he makes a friendly remark, tending 
towards “making up” the little difference that has arisen 
between you, let your reply be distinctly more friendly. 
If, in picking a quarrel, each party declined to go more 
than three-eighths of the way, and if, in making friends, 
each was ready to go five-eighths of the way—why, there 
would be more reconciliations than quarrels! Which is 
like the Irishman’s remonstrance to his gad-about daugh¬ 
ter—“Shure, you’re always goin’ out! You go out three 
times, for wanst that you come in!” 

My sixth Rule (and nty last remark about controversial 
correspondence) is, don't try to have the last word! How 



A MISCELLANY 


IO96 

many a controversy would be nipped in the bud, if each 
was anxious to let the other have the last word! Never 
mind how telling a rejoinder you leave unuttered: never 
mind your friend’s supposing that you are silent from lack 
of anything to say: let the thing drop, as soon as it is 
possible without discourtesy: remember “speech is silvern, 
but silence is golden”! (N.B.—If you are a gentleman, 
and your friend a lady, this Rule is superfluous: you 
wo’n't get the last word!) 

My seventh Rule is, if it should ever occur to you to 
write, jestingly, in dispraise of your friend, be sure you 
exaggerate enough to make the jesting obvious : a word 
spoken in jest, but taken as earnest, may lead to very 
serious consequences. I have known it to lead to the 
breaking-off of a friendship. Suppose, for instance, you 
wish to remind your friend of a sovereign you have lent 
him, which he has forgotten to repay—you might quite 
mean the words “I mention it, as you seem to have a con¬ 
veniently bad memory for debts”, in jest; yet there would 
be nothing to wonder at if he took offence at that way of 
putting it. But, suppose you wrote “Long observation of 
your career, as a pickpocket and a burglar, has convinced 
me that my one lingering hope, for recovering that 
sovereign I lent you, is to say ‘Pay up, or I’ll summons 
yer!’ ” he would indeed be a matter-of-fact friend if he 
took that as seriously meant! 

My eighth Rule. When you say, in your letter, “I en¬ 
close cheque for £5,” or "I enclose John’s letter for you 
to see”, leave off writing for a moment—go and get the 
document referred to—and put it into the envelope. Other¬ 
wise, you are pretty certain to find it lying about, after 
the Post has gone! 

My ninth Rule. When you get to the end of a note- 
sheet, and find you have more to say, take another piece 
of paper—a whole sheet, or a scrap, as the case may de¬ 
mand: but whatever you do, don’t cross! Remember the 
old proverb “ Cross-writing makes cross reading”. “The 
old proverb?” you say, inquiringly. “ How old?” Well, 



WISE WORDS ABOUT LETTER WRITING IO97 

not so very ancient, I must confess. In fact, I’m afraid 
I invented it while writing this paragraph! Still, you 
know, “old” is a comparative term. I think you would 
be quite justified in addressing a chicken, just out of the 
shell, as “Old boy!” when compared with another chicken, 
that was only half-out! 

4. HOW TO END A LETTER 

If doubtful whether to end with “yours faithfully”, or 
“yours truly”, or “your most truly”, &c. (there are at 
least a dozen varieties, before you reach “yours affection¬ 
ately”), refer to your correspondent's last letter, and make 
your winding-up at least as friendly as his : in fact, even 
if a shade more friendly, it will do no harm! 

A Postscript is a very useful invention: but it is not 
meant (as so many ladies suppose) to contain the real 
gist of the letter: it serves rather to throw into the shade 
any little matter we do not wish to make a fuss about. 
For example, your friend had promised to execute a 
commission for you in town, but forgot it, thereby put¬ 
ting you to great inconvenience: and he now writes to 
apologize for his negligence. It would be cruel, and need¬ 
lessly crushing, to make it the main subject of your reply. 
How much more gracefully it comes in thus! “P.S. Don’t 
distress yourself any more about having omitted that 
little matter in town. I wo'n’t deny that it did put my 
plans out a little, at the time: but it’s all right now. I 
often forget things, myself: and ‘those, who live in glass¬ 
houses, mustn’t throw stones', you know!” 

When you take your letters to the Post, carry them in 
your hand. If you put them in your pocket you will take 
a long country-walk (I speak from experience), passing 
the Post-Office twice, going and returning, and, when you 
get home, will find them still in your pocket. 

5. ON REGISTERING CORRESPONDENCE 

Let me recommend you to keep a record of Letters 
Received and Sent. I have kept one for many years, and 



A MISCELLANY 


IO98 

have found it of the greatest possible service, in many 
ways: it secures my answering Letters, however long they 
have to wait; it enables me to refer, for my own guidance, 
to the details of previous correspondence, though the 
actual Letters may have been destroyed long ago; and, 
most valuable feature of all, if any difficulty arises, years 
afterwards, in connection with a half-forgotten corres¬ 
pondence, it enables me to say, with confidence, “I did 
not tell you that he was ‘an invaluable servant in every 
way’, and that you couldn’t ‘trust him too much’. I have a 
precis of my letter. What I said was ‘he is a valuable 
servant in many ways, but don’t trust him too much’. So, 
if he’s cheated you, you really must not hold me respon¬ 
sible for it!” 

I will now give you a few simple Rules for making, 
and keeping a Letter-Register. 

Get a blank book, containing (say) 200 leaves, about 
4 inches wide and 7 high. It should be well fastened into 
its cover, as it will have to be opened and shut hundreds 
of times. Have a line ruled, in red ink, down each margin 
of every page, an inch off the edge (the margin should be 
wide enough to contain a number of 5 digits, easily: 
/ manage with a § inch margin: but, unless you write 
very small you will find an inch more comfortable). 

Write a precis of each Letter, received or sent, in 
chronological order. Let the entry of a “received” Letter 
reach from the left-hand edge to the right-hand marginal 
line; and the entry of a "sent” Letter from the left-hand 
marginal line to the right-hand edge. Thus the two kinds 
will be quite distinct, and you can easily hunt through 
the “received” Letters by themselves, without being 
bothered with the “sent” Letters; and vice versa. 

Use the right-hand pages only: and, when you come to 
the end of the book, turn it upside-down, and begin at 
the other end, still using right-hand pages. You will find 
this much more comfortable than using left-hand pages. 

You will find it convenient to write, at the top of every 
sheet of a “received” Letter, its Register-Number in full. 



WISE WORDS ABOUT LETTER WRITING IO99 

I will now give a few (ideal) specimen pages of my 
Letter-Register, and make a few remarks on them: after 
wdiich I think you will find it easy enough to manage 
one for yourself. 


29217 

/ 9 °. 


(217) 

Ap. 1. (Tu) Jones, Mrs. am 

27518 

sendg, 

as present from self and Mr. 


J., a 

white elephant. 

225 

(218) 

do. Wilkins & Co. bill, for 

28743 

grand 

piano, £175 10s. 6 d. [pd 

221, 2 

(219) 

do. Scareham, H. [writes from 


"Grand 

Hotel, Monte Carlo”] asking 


to borr 

ow £50 for a few weeks (!) 



(220) do. Scareham, H. would 

like to 


know object, for wh loan is 
and security offered. 

asked, 

218 

(221) Ap. 3. Wilkins & Co. 

in pre- 


vious letter, now before me, 

you 


undertobk to supply one for 

£120: 

246 

decling to pay more. 


23514 

(222) do. Cheetham & Sharp. 

have 

218 

written 221 — enclosing previo 

us let- 

228 

ter — is law on my side? 

[ 

(223) 

Ap. 4. Manager, Goods Statn, 


G. N. 

R. White Elephant arrived, ad- 


dressed 

to you — send for it at once — 


‘very 

savage.’ 

226 

29225 

/ 9 °. 


217 

(225) Ap. 4 (F) Jones, Mrs. th 

anks, 


but no room for it at present, am 

send- 

230 

ing it to Zoological Gardens. 



















1100 


A MISCELLANY 


223 

(226) do. Manager, Goods Sta 
N. R. please deliver, to bearer 
note, case containing White Ele- 
addressed to me. 

-- 

tn, G. 
of this 
phant 

223 

229 

(227) do. Director Zool. Garde 
closing above note to R. W. Ma 
call for valuable animal, prese 
Gardens. 

ns. (en- 
nager) 
nted to 

(228) 

Ap. 8. Cheetham & Sharp, you 

222 

misquot 

e enclosed letter, limit named 


is £18 

0. 

2 37 

(229) 

Ap. 9. Director, Zoo. Gardens. 

227 

case de 

livered to us contained 1 doz. 

230 

Port— 

consumed at Directors’ Ban- 


quet— 

many thanks. 


225 

(230) do. T Jones, Mrs. why 

call a 

G 

doz. of Port a ‘White Elephant’? 



do. T Jones, Mrs. 'it was a 

O 

29233 

/ 9 °. 



(233) Ap. 10 (Th) Page & Co. 

orderg 


Macaulay’s Essays and “Jane 

Eyre” 

242 

(cheap edtn). 


(234) 

do. Aunt Jemina — invitg for 


2 or 3 

days after the 15th. [ 

236 

Ml 

do. Lon. and West. Bk. have 



£250, pd to yr Acct fm Parkins 


& Co. 

Calcutta. [en 


234 

(236) do. . Aunt Jemina — can 

not 


possibly come this month, will 

write 

239 

when able. 

[ 




















WISE WORDS ABOUT LETTER WRITING IIOI 


228 

(237) Ap. ir. Cheetham and 

Co. re- 

240 

turn letter enclosed to you. 

[x 


(238) do. Morton, Philip. Co 

uld you 


lend me Browning’s “Dramati 

s Per- 

245 

sonae” for a day or 2? 


{239) 

Ap. 14. Aunt Jemina, leav- 

236 

ing hou 

se at end of month: address 


"136, 

Royal Avenue, Bath.” [ 


(240) 

Ap. 15. Cheetham and Co., 

237 

returng 

letter as reqd, bill 6/6/8. [ 

244 

29242 

/ 9 °. 


(242) 

Ap. 15. (Tu) Page & Co. bill 

233 

for boo 

ks, as ordered, 15/6 [ 

- 

( 243 ) 

do. f do. books 

J247 

240 

(244) do. Cheetham and Co. c 

an un- 

248 

derstand the 6/8 — what is £6 

for? 

wgm 

Ap. 17. Morton, P. “Dra- 

238 

H 

Personae,” as asked for. [retd 

249 

221 

(246) do. Wilkins and Co. w 

ith 

250 

bill, 175/10/6, and ch. for do. 

[en 

243 

(247) do. Page and Co. bill, 

15 / 6 , 


postal J 107258 for 15/- and 

6 stps. 

{248) 

Ap. 18. Cheetham and Co, it 

I244 

was a 

“clerical error” (!) 

1 

245 

(249) Ap. 19. Morton, P. retu 
Browning with many thanks. 

mg 

(250) 

do. Wilkins and Co. receptd 

246 

bill. 



































1102 


A MISCELLANY 


I begin each page by putting, at the top left-hand 
comer, the next entry-number I am going to use, in full 
(the last 3 digits of each entry-number are enough after¬ 
wards); and I put the date of the year, at the top, in the 
centre. 

I begin each entry with the last 3 digits of the entry- 
number, enclosed in an oval (this is difficult to reproduce 
in print, so I have put round-parentheses here). Then, for 
the first entry in each page, I put the day of the month 
and the day of the week: afterwards, “do/’ is enough for 
the month-day, till it changes: I do not repeat the 
week-day. 

Next, if the entry is not a letter, I put a symbol for 
“parcel” (see Nos. 243, 245) or “telegram” (see Nos. 230, 
231) as the case may be. 

Next, the name of the person, underlined (indicated 
here by italics). 

If an entry needs special further attention, I put [ at 
the end: and, when it has been attended to, I fill in the 
appropriate symbol, e.g., in No. 218, it showed that the 
bill had to be paid ; in No. 222, that an answer was really 
needed (the “ x ” means “attended to”); in No. 234, that 
I owed the old lady a visit; in No. 235, that the item had 
to be entered in my account book; in No. 236, that I must 
not forget to write; in No. 239, that the address had to be 
entered in my address-book; in No. 245, that the book 
had to be returned. 

I give each entry the space of 2 lines, whether it fills 
them or not, in order to have room for references. And, 
at the foot of each page I leave 2 or 3 lines blank (often 
useful afterwards for entering omitted Letters) and miss 
one or 2 numbers before I begin the next page. 

At any odd moments of leisure, I “make up” the entry- 
book, in various ways, as follows: 

(1) I draw a second line, at the right-hand end of the 
“received” entries, and at the left-hand end of the “sent” 
entries. This I usually do pretty well “up to date”. In my 
Register the first line is red, the second blue : here I dis- 



WISE WORDS ABOUT LETTER WRITING 1103 

tinguish them by making the first thin, and the second 
thick. 

(2) Beginning with the last entry, and going back¬ 
wards, I read over the names till I recognize one as 
having occurred already: I then link the two entries to¬ 
gether, by giving the one, that comes first in chronolo¬ 
gical order, a “foot-reference” (see Nos. 217, 225). I do 
not keep this "up to date”, but leave it till there are 4 or 
5 pages to be done. I work back till I come among entries 
that are all supplied with “foot-references”, when I once 
more glance through the last few pages, to see if there are 
any entries not yet supplied with head-references: their 
predecessors may need a special search. If an entry is 
connected, in subject, with another under a different 
name, I link them by cross-references, distinguished from 
the head- and foot-references by being written further 
from the marginal line (see No. 229). When 2 consecutive 
entries have the same name, and are both of the same 
kind (i.e. both “received” or both “sent”) I bracket them 
(see Nos. 242, 243); if of different kinds, I link them with 
the symbol used for Nos. 219, 220. 

(3) Beginning at the earliest entry not yet done with, 
and going forwards, I cross out every entry that has got 
a head- and foot-reference, and is done with, by continu¬ 
ing the extra line through it (see Nos. 221, 223, 225). Thus, 
wherever a break occurs in this extra line, it shows there 
is some matter still needing attention. I do not keep this 
anything like “up to date”, but leave it till there are 30 or 
40 pages to look through at a time. When the first page in 
the volume is thus completely crossed out, I put a mark 
at the foot of the page to indicate this; and so with pages 
2, 3, &c. Hence, whenever I do this part of the “making- 
up”, I need not begin at the beginning of the volume, but 
only at the earliest page that has not got this mark. 

All this looks very complicated, when stated at full 
length: but you will find it perfectly simple, when you 
have had a little practice, and will come to regard the 
“making-up” as a pleasant occupation for a rainy day, 



A MISCELLANY 


1104 

or at any time that you feel disinclined for more severe 
mental work. In the Game of Whist, Hoyle gives us one 
golden Rule, “When in doubt, win the trick”—I find that 
Rule admirable for real life: when in doubt what to do, 
I “make-up” my Letter-Register! 


WHAT THE TORTOISE 
SAID TO ACHILLES 

Achilles had overtaken the Tortoise, and had seated 
himself comfortably on its back. 

“So you’ve got to the end of our race-course?” said the 
Tortoise. “Even though it does consist of an infinite series 
of distances? I thought some wiseacre or other had proved 
that the thing couldn’t be done?” 

“It can be done,” said Achilles. “It has been done! 
Solvitur ambulando. You see the distances were constantly 
diminishing : and so ” 

“But if they had been constantly increasing ?” the 
Tortoise interrupted. “How then?” 

“Then I shouldn’t be here,” Achilles modestly replied; 
“andyow would have got several times round the world, 
by this time!” 

“You flatter m flatten, I mean,” said the Tortoise; 
“for you are a heavy weight, and no mistake! Well now, 
would you like to hear of a race-course, that most people 
fancy they can get to the end of in two or three steps, 
while it really consists of an infinite number of distances, 
each one longer than the previous one?” 

“Very much indeed!” said the Grecian warrior, as he 
drew from his helmet (few Grecian warriors possessed 
pockets in those days) an enormous note-book and a pen¬ 
cil. “Proceed! And speak slowly, please! Short-hand isn’t 
invented yet!” 



WHAT THE TORTOISE SAID TO ACHILLES 1105 

“That beautiful First Proposition of Euclid!” the 
Tortoise murmured dreamily. "You admire Euclid?” 

“Passionately! So far, at least, as one can admire a 
treatise that wo’n’t be published for some centuries to 
come!” 

"Well, now, let’s take a little bit of the argument in 
that First Proposition—just two steps, and the conclusion 
drawn from them. Kindly enter them in your note-book. 
And, in order to refer to them conveniently, let’s call 
them A, B, and Z: 

(A) Things that are equal to the same are equal to each 
other. 

(B) The two sides of this Triangle are things that are 
equal to the same. 

(Z) The two sides of this Triangle are equal to each 
other. 

“Readers of Euclid will grant, I suppose, that Z follows 
logically from A and B, so that any one who accepts A 
and B as true, must accept Z as true?” 

“Undoubtedly! The youngest child in a High School— 
as soon as High Schools are invented, which will not be 
till some two thousand years later—will grant that.” 

“And if some reader had not yet accepted A and B as 
true, he might still accept the Sequence as a valid one, I 
suppose?” 

“No doubt such a reader might exist. He might say ‘I 
accept as true the Hypothetical Proposition that, if A and 
B be true, Z must be true; but I don’t accept A and B as 
true’. Such a reader would do wisely in abandoning 
Euclid, and taking to football.” 

“And might there not also be some reader who would 
say ‘I accept A and B as true, but I don’t accept the 
Hypothetical'?” 

“Certainly there might. He, also, had better take to 
football.” 

“And neither of these readers”, the Tortoise continued, 
“is as yet under any logical necessity to accept Z as 
true?” 

2N L.C. 



no6 


A MISCELLANY 


"Quite so," Achilles assented. 

"Well, now, I want you to consider me as a reader of 
the second kind, and to force me, logically, to accept Z as 
true." 

"A tortoise playing football would be-” Achilles 

was beginning. 

"—an anomaly, of course,” the Tortoise hastily inter¬ 
rupted. "Don’t wander from the point. Let’s have Z first, 
and football afterwards! ’ ’ 

"I’m to force you to accept Z, am I?” Achilles said 
musingly. "And your present position is that you accept 
A and B, but you don’t accept the Hypothetical-’’ 

"Let’s call it C,” said the Tortoise. 

"—but you don’t accept: 

(C) If A and B are true, Z must be true.” 

"That is my present position,” said the Tortoise. 

"Then I must ask you to accept C.” 

"I’ll do so”, said the Tortoise, "as soon as you’ve 
entered it in that note-book of yours. What else have you 
got in it?” 

"Only a few memoranda,” said Achilles, nervously 
fluttering the leaves: "a few memoranda of—of the 
battles in which I have distinguished myself!” 

"Plenty of blank leaves, I see!” the Tortoise cheerily 
remarked. "We shall need them all\” (Achilles shud¬ 
dered.) "Now write as I dictate: 

(A) Things that are equal to the same are equal to 
each other. 

(B) The two sides of this triangle are things that are 
equal to the same. 

(C) If A and B are true, Z must be true. 

(Z) The two sides of this Triangle are equal to each 
other.” 

"You should call it D, not Z,” said Achilles. "It comes 
next to the other three. If you accept A and B and C, 
you must accept Z.” 

‘‘ And why must IV’ 

"Because it follows logically from them. If A and B and 



WHAT THE TORTOISE SAID TO ACHILLES 1107 

C are true, Z must be true. You don't dispute that, I 
imagine?” 

"If A and B and C are true, Z must be true,” the Tor¬ 
toise thoughtfully repeated. "That's another Hypothe¬ 
tical, isn’t it? And, if I failed to see its truth, I might 
accept A and B and C, and still not accept Z, mightn’t I ? ” 

“You might,” the candid hero admitted; "though such 
obtuseness would certainly be phenomenal. Still, the 
event is possible. So I must ask you to grant one more 
Hypothetical.” 

“Very good. I’m quite willing to grant it, as soon as 
you’ve written it down. We will call it 

(D) If A and B and C are true, Z must be true. 

"Have you entered that in your note-book?” 

“I havel” Achilles joyfully exclaimed, as he ran the 
pencil into its sheath. "And at last we’ve got to the end 
of this ideal race-course! Now that you accept A and B 
and C and D, of course you accept Z.” 

"Do I?” said the Tortoise innocently. "Let’s make that 
quite clear. I accept A and B and C and D. Suppose I 
still refuse to accept Z?” 

"Then Logic would take you by the throat, and force 
you to do it!” Achilles triumphantly replied. “Logic 
would tell you ‘You ca’n’t help yourself. Now that you’ve 
accepted A and B and C and D, you must accept Z!’ So 
you’ve no choice, you see.” 

"Whatever Logic is good enough to tell me is worth 
writing down,” said the Tortoise. “So enter it in your 
book, please. We will call it 

(E) If A and B and C and D are true, Z must be true. 

"Until I’ve granted that, of course, I needn’t grant Z. 

So it’s quite a necessary step, you see?” 

"I see,” said Achilles; and there was a touch of sadness 
in his tone. 

Here the narrator, having pressing business at the 
Bank, was obliged to leave the happy pair, and did not 
again pass the spot until some months afterwards. When 
he did so, Achilles was still seated on the back of the 



iio8 


A MISCELLANY 


much-enduring Tortoise, and was writing in his note¬ 
book, which appeared to be nearly full. The Tortoise was 
saying “Have you got that last step written down? Un¬ 
less I’ve lost count, that makes a thousand and one. There 
are several millions more to come. And would you mind, 
as a personal favour—considering what a lot of instruc¬ 
tion this colloquy of ours will provide for the Logicians of 
the Nineteenth Century —would you mind adopting a pun 
that my cousin the Mock-Turtle will then make, and 
allowing yourself to be re-named Taught-Us?” 

“As you please!’’ replied the weary warrior, in the 
hollow tones of despair, as he buried his face in his hands. 
“Provided that you, for your part, will adopt a pun the 
Mock-Turtle never made, and allow yourself to be re¬ 
named A Kill-Ease!’’ 


THE TWO CLOCKS 

Which is better, a clock that is right only once a year, 
or a clock that is right twice every day? “The latter,” you 
reply, “unquestionably.” Very good, now attend. 

I have two clocks: one doesn’t go at all, and the other 
loses a minute a day: which would you prefer? “The 
losing one,” you answer, “without a doubt.” Now ob¬ 
serve: the one which loses a minute a day has to lose 
twelve hours, or seven hundred and twenty minutes be¬ 
fore it is right again, consequently it is only right once in 
two years, whereas the other is evidently right as often 
as the time it points to comes round, which happens twice 
a day. 

So you’ve contradicted yourself once. 

"Ah, but,” you say, “what’s the use of its being right 
twice a day, if I ca’n’t tell when the time comes? ” 

Why, suppose the clock points to eight o’clock, don’t 



PHOTOGRAPHY EXTRAORDINARY IIOQ 

you see that the clock is right at eight o’clock? Conse¬ 
quently, when eight o’clock comes round your clock is 
right. 

“Yes, I see that,” you reply. 

Very good, then you’ve contradicted yourself twice: 
now get out of the difficulty as best you can, and don’t 
contradict yourself again if you can help it. 

You might go on to ask, "How am I to know when 
eight o’clock does come? My clock will not tell me.” Be 
patient: you know that when eight o’clock comes your 
clock is right, very good; then your rule is this: keep your 
eye fixed on your clock, and the very moment it is right 

it will be eight o’clock. “But-,” you say. There, that’ll 

do; the more you argue the farther you get from the 
point, so it will be as well to stop. 


PHOTOGRAPHY EXTRAORDINARY 

The recent extraordinary discovery in Photography, as 
applied to the operations of the mind, has reduced the 
art of novel-writing to the merest mechanical labour. We 
have been kindly permitted by the artist to be present 
during one of his experiments; but as the invention has 
not yet been given to the world, we are only at liberty 
to relate the results, suppressing all details of chemicals 
and manipulation. 

The operator began by stating that the ideas of the 
feeblest intellect, when once received on properly pre¬ 
pared paper, could be “developed” up to any required 
degree of intensity. On hearing our wish that he would 
begin with an extreme case, he obligingly summoned a 
young man from an adjoining room, who appeared to be 
of the very weakest possible physical and mental powers. 
On being asked what we thought of him we candidly 



iiio 


A MISCELLANY 


confessed that he seemed incapable of anything but sleep; 
our friend cordially assented to this opinion. 

The machine being in position, and a mesmeric rap¬ 
port established between the mind of the patient and the 
object glass, the young man was asked whether he wished 
to say anything; he feebly replied “Nothing”. He was 
then asked what he was thinking of, and the answer, as 
before, was “Nothing”. The artist on this pronounced 
him to be in a most satisfactory state, and at once com¬ 
menced the operation. 

After the paper had been exposed for the requisite 
time, it was removed and submitted to our inspection; 
we found it to be covered with faint and almost illegible 
characters. A closer scrutiny revealed the following: 

“The eve was soft and dewy mild; a zephyr whispered 
in the lofty glade, and a few light drops of rain cooled the 
thirsty soil. At a slow amble, along the primrose-bordered 
path rode a gentle-looking and amiable youth, holding a 
light cane in his delicate hand; the pony moved gracefully 
beneath him, inhaling as it went the fragrance of the 
roadside flowers; the calm smile, and languid eyes, so 
admirably harmonizing with the fair features of the rider, 
showed the even tenor of his thoughts. With a sweet 
though feeble voice, he plaintively murmured out the 
gentle regrets that clouded his breast: 

‘Alas! she would not hear my prayer! 

Yet it were rash to tear my hair; 

Disfigured, I should be less fair. 

‘She was unwise, I may say blind; 

Once she was lovingly inclined; 

Some circumstance has changed her mind.’ 

There was a moment’s silence; the pony stumbled over 
a stone in the path, and unseated his rider. A crash was 
heard among the dried leaves; the youth arose; a slight 
bruise on his left shoulder, and a disarrangement of his 
cravat, were the only traces that remained of this trifling 
accident.” 



PHOTOGRAPHY EXTRAORDINARY IIII 

“This”, we remarked, as we returned the paper, “be¬ 
longs apparently to the milk-and-water School of Novels. ’ ’ 

“You are quite right,” our friend replied, “and, in its 
present state, it is, of course, utterly unsaleable in the 
present day: we shall find, however, that the next stage 
of development will remove it into the strong-minded or 
Matter-of-Fact School.” After dipping it into various 
acids, he again submitted it to us; it had now become the 
following: 

“The evening was of the ordinary character, barometer 
at 'change’; a wind was getting up in the wood, and some 
rain was beginning to fall; a bad look-out for the farmers. 
A gentleman approached along the bridle-road, carrying 
a stout knobbed stick in his hand, and mounted on a 
serviceable nag, possibly worth some £40 or so; there was 
a settled business-like expression on the rider’s face, and 
he whistled as he rode; he seemed to be hunting for 
rhymes in his head, and at length repeated, in a satisfied 
tone, the following composition: 

‘Well! so my offer was no go! 

She might do worse, I told her so; 

She was a fool to answer “No”. 

‘However, things are as they stood; 

Nor would I have her if I could, 

For there are plenty more as good.’ 

At this moment the horse set his foot in a hole, and rolled 
over; his rider rose with difficulty; he had sustained 
several severe bruises and fractured two ribs; it was some 
time before he forgot that unlucky day.” 

We returned this with the strongest expression of ad¬ 
miration, and requested that it might now be developed 
to the highest possible degree. Our friend readily con¬ 
sented, and shortly presented us with the result, which 
he informed us belonged to the Spasmodic or German 
School. We perused it with indescribable sensations of 
surprise and delight: 



III2 


A MISCELLANY 


“The night was wildly tempestuous—a hurricane raved 
through the murky forest—furious torrents of rain lashed 
the groaning earth. With a headlong rush—down a 
precipitous mountain gorge—dashed a mounted horse¬ 
man armed to the teeth—his horse bounded beneath him 
at a mad gallop, snorting fire from its distended nostrils 
as it flew. The rider's knotted brows—rolling eyeballs— 
and clenched teeth—expressed the intense agony of his 
mind—weird visions loomed upon his burning brain— 
while with a mad yell he poured forth the torrent of his 
boiling passion: 

'Firebrands and daggers! hope hath fled! 

To atoms dash the doubly dead! 

My brain is fire—my heart is lead! 

‘Her soul is flint, and what am I ? 

Scorch’d by her fierce, relentless eye. 

Nothingness is my destiny!’ 

There was a moment’s pause. Horror! his path ended in a 
fathomless abyss. ... A rush—a flash—a crash—all was 
over. Three drops of blood, two teeth, and a stirrup were 
all that remained to tell where the wild horseman met his 
doom.” 

The young man was now recalled to consciousness, and 
shown the result of the workings of his mind; he instantly 
fainted away. 

In the present infancy of the art we forbear from fur¬ 
ther comment on this wonderful discovery; but the mind 
reels as it contemplates the stupendous addition thus 
made to the powers of science. 

Our friend concluded with various minor experiments, 
such as working up a passage of Wordsworth into strong, 
sterling poetry: the same experiment was tried on a pas¬ 
sage of Byron, at our request, but the paper came out 
scorched and blistered all over by the fiery epithets thus 
produced. 

As a concluding remark: could this art be applied (we 



HINTS FOR ETIQUETTE III 3 

put the question in the strictest confidence )—could it, we 
ask, be applied to the speeches in Parliament? It may be 
but a delusion of our heated imagination, but we will still 
cling fondly to the idea, and hope against hope. 


HINTS FOR ETIQUETTE; 

OR, DINING OUT MADE EASY 

As caterers for the public taste, we can conscientiously 
recommend this book to all diners-out who are perfectly 
unacquainted with the usages of society. However we 
may regret that our author has confined himself to warn¬ 
ing rather than advice, we are bound in justice to say 
that nothing here stated will be found to contradict the 
habits of the best circles. The following examples exhibit 
a depth of penetration and a fullness of experience rarely 
met with: 


I 

In proceeding to the dining-room, the gentleman gives 
one arm to the lady he escorts—it is unusual to offer both. 

II 

The practice of taking soup with the next gentleman 
but one is now wisely discontinued; but the custom of 
asking your host his opinion of the weather immediately 
on the removal of the first course still prevails. 

hi 

To use a fork with your soup, intimating at the same 
time to your hostess that you are reserving the spoon for 
the beefsteaks, is a practice wholly exploded. 



iii 4 


A MISCELLANY 


IV 

On meat being placed before you, there is no possible 
objection to your eating it, if so disposed; still, in all such 
delicate cases, be guided entirely by the conduct of those 
around you. 


v 

It is always allowable to ask for artichoke jelly with 
your boiled venison; however, there are houses where this 
is not supplied. 

VI 

The method of helping roast turkey with two carving- 
forks is practicable, but deficient in grace. 

VII 

We do not recommend the practice of eating cheese 
with a knife and fork in one hand, and a spoon and wine¬ 
glass in the other; there is a kind of awkwardness in the 
action which no amount of practice can entirely dispel. 

VIII 

As a general rule, do not kick the shins of the opposite 
gentleman under the table, if personally unacquainted 
with him; your pleasantry is liable to be misunderstood 
—a circumstance at all times unpleasant. 

IX 

Proposing the health of the boy in buttons immediately 
on the removal of the cloth is a custom springing from 
regard to his tender years, rather than from a strict 
adherence to the rules of etiquette. 





A HEMISPHERICAL PROBLEM 

Half of the world, or nearly so, is always in the light 
of the sun: as the world turns round, this hemisphere 
of light shifts round too, and passes over each part of it 
in succession. 

Supposing on Tuesday, it is morning at London; in 
another hour it would be Tuesday morning at the west 
of England; if the whole world were land we might go 
on tracing 1 Tuesday morning, Tuesday morning all the 
way round, till in twenty-four hours we get to London 
again. But we know that at London twenty-four hours 
after Tuesday morning it is Wednesday morning. Where, 
then, in its passage round the earth, does the day change 
its name? Where does it lose its identity? 

Practically there is no difficulty in it, because a great 
part of the journey is over water, and what it does out 
at sea no one can tell: and besides there are so many 
different languages that it would be hopeless to attempt 
to trace the name of any one day all the year round. But 
is the case inconceivable that the same land and the same 
language should continue all round the world? I cannot 
see that it is: in that case either 2 there would be no dis¬ 
tinction at all between each successive day, and so week, 
month, etc., so that we should have to say, “The Battle 
of Waterloo happened to-day, about two million hours 
ago,” or some line would have to be fixed where the 
change should take place, so that the inhabitants of one 
house would wake and say, “Heigh-ho, 3 Tuesday morn¬ 
ing!” and the inhabitants of the next (over the line), a 

1 The best way is to imagine yourself walking round with the 
sun and asking the inhabitants as you go, ‘‘What morning is this?” 
If you suppose them living all the way around, and all speaking 
one language, the difficulty is obvious. 

2 This is clearly an impossible case, and is only put as an hypo¬ 
thesis. 

3 The usual exclamation at waking, generally said with a yawn. 

IU5 



A MISCELLANY 


IIl6 

few miles to the west would wake a few minutes after¬ 
wards and say, “Heigh-ho! Wednesday morning!” What 
hopeless confusion the people who happened to live on 
the line would be in, is not for me to say. There would 
be a quarrel every morning as to what the name of the 
day should be. I can imagine no third case, unless every¬ 
body was allowed to choose for themselves, which state of 
things would be rather worse than either of the other two. 

I am aware that this idea has been started before— 
namely, by the unknown author of that beautiful poem 
beginning, “If all the world were apple pie,” etc. 1 The 
particular result here discussed, however, does not appear 
to have occurred to him, as he confines himself to the diffi¬ 
culties in obtaining drink which would certainly ensue. 


A SELECTION FROM 
SYMBOLIC LOGIC 

(Even in his most abstruse works on mathematics and logic, 
Lewis Carroll could not fully repress his instinct for nonsense. 
SYMBOLIC LOGIC, for instance, shows the mind of Charles 
Lutwidge Dodgson rather than the whimsical Lewis Carroll. 
There would be little logic in offering here the entire text of 
SYMBOLIC LOGIC. Accordingly, the editors have chosen a 
single example to represent Carroll as he appeared in a com¬ 
pletely un-Carrollean book.) 

Introduction 
TO LEARNERS 

The Learner, who wishes to try the question fairly, 
whether this little book does, or does not, supply the ma- 

1 "If all the world were apple pie, 

And all the sea were ink, 

And all the trees were bread and cheese. 

What should we have to drink?” 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC III 7 

terials for a most interesting mental recreation, is earnest¬ 
ly advised to adopt the following Rules: 

(1) Begin at the beginning, and do not allow yourself 
to gratify a mere idle curiosity by dipping into the book, 
here and there. This would very likely lead to your throw¬ 
ing it aside, with the remark “This is much too hard for 
me!”, and thus losing the chance of adding a very large 
item to your stock of mental delights. This Rule (of not 
dipping) is very desirable with other kinds of books— 
such as novels, for instance, where you may easily spoil 
much of the enjoyment you would otherwise get from 
the story, by dipping into it further on, so that what the 
author meant to be a pleasant surprise comes to you as 
a matter of course. Some people, I know, make a practice 
of looking into Vol. Ill first, just to see how the story 
ends: and perhaps it is as well just to know that all ends 
happily —that the much-persecuted lovers do marry after 
all, that he is proved to be quite innocent of the murder, 
that the wicked cousin is completely foiled in his plot 
and gets the punishment he deserves, and that the rich 
uncle in India ( Qu . Why in India ? Ans. Because, some¬ 
how, uncles never can get rich anywhere else) dies at ex¬ 
actly the right moment—before taking the trouble to 
read Vol. I. This, I say, is just permissible with a novel, 
where Vol. Ill has a meaning, even for those who have not 
read the earlier part of the story; but, with a scientific 
book, it is sheer insanity: you will find the latter part 
hopelessly unintelligible, if you read it before reaching it 
in regular course. 

(2) Don’t begin any fresh Chapter, or Section, until 
you are certain that you thoroughly understand the whole 
book up to that point, and that you have worked, cor¬ 
rectly, most if not all of the examples which have been 
set. So long as you are conscious that all the land you 
have passed through is absolutely conquered, and that 
you are leaving no unsolved difficulties behind you, which 
will be sure to turn up again later on, your triumphal 
progress will be easy and delightful. Otherwise, you will 



A MISCELLANY 


IIl8 

find your state of puzzlement get worse and worse as 
you proceed, till you give up the whole thing in utter 
disgust. 

(3) When you come to any passage you don’t under¬ 
stand, read it again : if you still don’t understand it, read 
it again : if you fail, even after three readings, very likely 
your brain is getting a little tired. In that case, put the 
book away, and take to other occupations, and next day, 
when you come to it fresh, you will very likely find that 
it is quite easy. 

(4) If possible, find some genial friend, who will read 
the book along with you, and will talk over the difficulties 
with you. Talking is a wonderful smoother-over of dif¬ 
ficulties. When I come upon anything—in Logic or in 
any other hard subject—that entirely puzzles me, I find it 
a capital plan to talk it over, aloud, even when I am all 
alone. One can explain things so clearly to one's self! And 
then, you know, one is so patient with one’s self: one 
never gets irritated at one’s own stupidity! 

If, dear Reader, you will faithfully observe these Rules, 
and so give my little book a really fair trial, I promise 
you, most confidently, that you will find Symbolic Logic 
to be one of the most, if not the most, fascinating of mental 
recreations! In this First Part, I have carefully avoided 
all difficulties which seemed to me to be beyond the grasp 
of an intelligent child of (say) twelve or fourteen years of 
age. I have myself taught most of its contents, viva voce, 
to many children, and have found them take a real intelli¬ 
gent interest in the subject. For those, who succeed in 
mastering Part I, and who begin, like Oliver, “asking for 
more”, I hope to provide, in Part II, some tolerably hard 
nuts to crack—nuts that will require all the nut-crackers 
they happen to possess! 

Mental recreation is a thing that we all of us need for 
our mental health; and you may get much healthy en¬ 
joyment, no doubt, from Games, such as Backgammon, 
Chess, and the new Game “Halma”. But, after all, when 
you have made yourself a first-rate player at any one of 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC III9 

these Games, you have nothing real to show for it, as a 
resultl You enjoyed the Game, and the victory, no doubt, 
at the time: but you have no result that you can treasure up 
and get real good out of. And, all the while, you have been 
leaving unexplored a perfect mine of wealth. Once master 
the machinery of Symbolic Logic, and you have a mental 
occupation always at hand, of absorbing interest, and 
one that will be of real use to you in any subject you may 
take up. It will give you clearness of thought—the ability 
to see your way through a puzzle—the habit of arranging 
your ideas in an orderly and get-at-able form—and, more 
valuable than all, the power to detect fallacies, and to 
tear to pieces the flimsy illogical arguments, which you 
will so continually encounter in books, in newspapers, in 
speeches, and even in sermons, and which so easily delude 
those who have never taken the trouble to master this 
fascinating Art. Try it. That is all I ask of you! L.C. 

29, Bedford Street, Strand. 

February 21,1896. 


Sets of Concrete Propositions, proposed as Premisses for 
Sorites. Conclusions to be found. 

1 

(1) Babies are illogical; 

(2) Nobody is despised who can manage a crocodile; 

(3) Illogical persons are despised. 

Univ. "persons”; a = able to manage a crocodile; 
b = babies; c = despised; d = logical. 

2 

(1) My saucepans are the only things I have that are 

made of tin; 

(2) I find dll your presents very useful; 

(3) None of my saucepans are of the slightest use. 

Univ. "things of mine”; a = made of tin; b = my sauce¬ 
pans; c = useful; d = your presents. 



1120 


A MISCELLANY 


3 

(1) No potatoes of mine, that are new, have been boiled; 

(2) All my potatoes in this dish are fit to eat; 

(3) No unboiled potatoes of mine are fit to eat. 

Univ. “my potatoes”; a =boiled; b = eatable; c =in 

this dish; d =new. 

4 

(1) There are no Jews in the kitchen; 

(2) No Gentiles say “shpoonj”; 

(3) My servants are all in the kitchen. 

Univ. “persons”; a=in the kitchen; 5 = Jews; c =my 
servants; d = saying “shpoonj”. 

5 

(1) No ducks waltz; 

(2) No officers ever decline to waltz; 

(3) All my poultry are ducks. 

Univ. “creatures”; a = ducks; b =my poultry ; 
c = officers; d — willing to waltz. 

6 

(1) Every one who is sane can do Logic; 

(2) No lunatics are fit to serve on a jury; 

(3) None of your sons can do Logic. 

Univ. “persons”; a = able to do Logic; b = fit to serve 
on a jury; c =sane; d =your sons. 

7 

(1) There are no pencils of mine in this box; 

(2) No sugar-plums of mine are cigars; 

(3) The whole of my property, that is not in this box, 

consists of cigars. 

Univ. “things of mine”; a = cigars; b =in this box; 
c = pencils; d= sugar-plums. 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC II2I 


8 

(1) No experienced person is incompetent; 

(2) Jenkins is always blundering; 

(3) No competent person is always blundering. 

Univ. “persons”; a = always blundering; b — com¬ 
petent; c = experienced; d = Jenkins. 

9 

(1) No terriers wander among the signs of the zodiac; 

(2) Nothing, that does not wander among the signs of the 

zodiac, is a comet; 

(3) Nothing but a terrier has a curly tail. 

Univ. "things”; a = comets; b = curly-tailed; c = ter¬ 
riers; d — wandering among the signs of the zodiac. 

10 

(1) No one takes in the Times, unless he is well-educated; 

(2) No hedge-hogs can read; 

(3) Those who cannot read are not well-educated. 

Univ. "creatures”; a = able to read; b = hedge-hogs; 

c = taking in the Times ; d = well-educated. 

11 

(1) All puddings are nice; 

(2) This dish is a pudding; 

(3) No nice things are wholesome. 

Univ. "things”; a =nice; 6 = puddings; c = this dish; 
d= wholesome. 

12 

(1) My gardener is well worth listening to on military 

subjects; 

(2) No one can remember the battle of Waterloo, unless 

he is very old; 

(3) Nobody is really worth listening to on military sub¬ 

jects, unless he can remember the battle of Water¬ 
loo. 



1122 


A MISCELLANY 


Univ. “persons”; a = able to remember the battle of 
Waterloo; b =my gardener; c = worth listening to 
on military subjects; d = very old. 

13 

(1) All humming birds are richly coloured; 

(2) No large birds live on honey; 

(3) Birds that do not live on honey are dull in colour. 

Univ. “birds”; a = humming-birds; b = large; c = living 

on honey; d = richly coloured. 

(1) No Gentiles have hooked noses; 

(2) A man who is a good hand at a bargain always makes 

money; 

( 3 ) No Jew is ever a bad hand at a bargain. 

Univ. “persons”; a =good hands at a bargain; 
b - hook-nosed; c = Jews; d = making money. 

15 

(1) All ducks in this village that are branded “B”, belong 

to Mrs. Bond; 

(2) Ducks in this village never wear lace collars, unless 

they are branded “B”; 

(3) Mrs. Bond has no gray ducks in this village. 

Univ. “ducks in this village”; a — belonging to Mrs. 

Bond; b = branded “B”; c = gray; d = wearing 
lace collars. 

16 

(1) All the old articles in this cupboard are cracked; 

(2) No jug in this cupboard is new; 

(3) Nothing in this cupboard, that is cracked, will hold 

water. 

Univ. “things in this cupboard”; a = able to hold water; 
b = cracked; c = jugs; d = old. 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC 


1123 


17 

(1) All unripe fruit is unwholesome; 

(2) All these apples are wholesome; 

(3) No fruit, grown in the shade, is ripe. 

Univ. "fruit”; a = grown in the shade; b =ripe; 
c = these apples; d = wholesome. 

18 

(1) Puppies, that will not He still, are always grateful for 

the loan of a skipping-rope; 

(2) A lame puppy would not say “thank you” if you 

offered to lend it a skipping-rope; 

(3) None but lame puppies ever care to do worsted-work. 

Univ. "puppies”; a = caring to do worsted-work; 
b = grateful for the loan of a skipping-rope; 
c =lame; d = wilhng to He stiH. 

19 

(1) No name in this Hst is unsuitable for the hero of a 

romance; 

(2) Names beginning with a vowel are always melodious; 

(3) No name is suitable for the hero of a romance, if it 

begins with a consonant. 

Univ. "names”-; a = beginning with a vowel; b =in 
this Hst; c = melodious; d = suitable for the 
hero of a romance. 

20 

(1) AH members of the House of Commons have perfect 

self-command; 

(2) No M.P., who wears a coronet, should ride in a 

donkey-race; 

(3) All members of the House of Lords wear coronets. 
Univ. “M.P.'s”; a = belonging to the House of Com¬ 
mons; b = having perfect self-command; c = one who 

may ride in a donkey-race; d = wearing a coronet. 



1124 


A MISCELLANY 


21 

(1) No goods in this shop, that have been bought and 

paid for, are still on sale; 

(2) None of the goods may be carried away, unless labeled 

“sold”; 

(3) None of the goods are labeled “sold” unless they have 

been bought and paid for. 

Univ. “goods in this shop”; a = allowed to be carried 
away; b = bought and paid for; c = labeled “sold”; 
d = on sale. 


22 

(1) No acrobatic feats, that are not announced in the bills 

of a circus, are ever attempted there; 

(2) No acrobatic feat is possible, if it involves turning a 

quadruple somersault; 

(3) No impossible acrobatic feat is ever announced in a 

circus bill. 

Univ. “acrobatic feats”; a = announced in the bills of a 
circus; b = attempted in a circus; c= involving the 
turning of a quadruple somersault; d= possible. 


23 

(1) Nobody, who really appreciates Beethoven, fails to 

keep silence while the Moonlight-Sonata is being 
played; 

(2) Guinea-pigs are hopelessly ignorant of music; 

(3) No one, who is hopelessly ignorant of music, ever 

keeps silence while the Moonlight-Sonata is being 
played. 

Univ. "creatures”; a = guinea-pigs; b = hopelessly ignor¬ 
ant of music; keeping silence while the Moon¬ 
light-Sonata is being played; d = really 
appreciating Beethoven. 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC 


1125 


24 

(1) Coloured flowers are always scented; 

(2) I dislike flowers that are not grown in the open air; 

(3) No flowers grown in the open air are colourless. 

Univ. "flowers"; a = coloured; b = grown in the open 

air; c = liked by me; d = scented. 

25 

(1) Showy talkers think too much of themselves; 

(2) No really well-informed people are bad company; 

(3) People who think too much of themselves are not 

good company. 

Univ. "persons"; a = good company; b = really well- 
informed; c — showy talkers; d = thinking too 
much of one’s self. 

26 

(1) No boys under 12 are admitted to this school as 

boarders; 

(2) All the industrious boys have red hair; 

(3) None of the day-boys learn Greek; 

(4) None but those under 12 are idle. 

Univ. “boys in this school”; a = boarders; b = industri¬ 
ous; c = learning Greek; d = red-haired; e — under 12. 

27 

(1) The only articles of food, that my doctor allows me, 

are such as are not very rich; 

(2) Nothing that agrees with me is unsuitable for supper; 
{3) Wedding-cake is always very rich; 

(4) My doctor allows me all articles of food that are suit¬ 
able for supper. 

Univ. "articles of food”; a = agreeing with me; 
b= allowed by my doctor; c= suitable for supper; 
d=ve ry rich; e = wedding-cake. 



1126 


A MISCELLANY 


28 

(1) No discussions in our Debating-Club are likely to 

rouse the British Lion, so long as they are checked 
when they become too noisy; 

(2) Discussions, unwisely conducted, endanger the 

peacefulness of our Debating-Club; 

(3) Discussions, that go on while Tomkins is in the 

Chair, are likely to rouse the British Lion; 

(4) Discussions in our Debating-Club, when wisely con¬ 

ducted, are always checked when they become too 
noisy. 

Univ. “discussions in our Debating-Club”; a = checked 
when too noisy; b = dangerous to the peacefulness of our 
Debating-Club; c =going on while Tomkins is in the 
Chair; d =likely to rouse the British Lion; 
e —wisely conducted. 


29 

(1) All my sons are slim; 

(2) No child of mine is healthy who takes no exercise; 

(3) All gluttons, who are children of mine, are fat; 

(4) No daughter of mine takes any exercise. 

Univ. “my children”; a==fat; 6=gluttons; 
c = healthy; i = sons; e = taking exercise. 


30 

(1) Things sold in the street are of no great value; 

(2) Nothing but rubbish can be had for a song; 

( 3 ) Eggs of the Great Auk are very valuable; 

(4) It is only what is sold in the streets that is really 

rubbish. 

Univ. “things”; a = able to be had for a song; 6 = eggs of 
the Great Auk; c = rubbish; d = sold in the street; 
e = very valuable. 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC 


1127 


31 

(1) No books sold here have gilt edges, except what are 

in the front shop; 

(2) All the authorized editions have red labels; 

(3) All the books with red labels are priced at 5s. and 

upwards; 

(4) None but authorized editions are ever placed in the 

front shop. 

Univ. “books sold here"; a = authorized editions; 
b = gilt-edged; c = having red labels; d = in the front shop; 
e = priced as 5s. and upwards. 

32 

(1) Remedies for bleeding, which fail to check it, are a 

mockery; 

(2) Tincture of Calendula is not to be despised; 

(3) Remedies, which will check the bleeding when you 

cut your finger, are useful; 

(4) All mock remedies for bleeding are despicable. 

Univ. "remedies for bleeding”; a — able to check bleed¬ 
ing; b = despicable; c — mockeries; d— Tincture of Calen¬ 
dula; e= useful when you cut your finger. 

33 

(1) None of the unnoticed things, met with at sea, are 

mermaids; 

(2) Things entered in the log, as met with at sea, are sure 

to be worth remembering; 

(3) 1 have never met with anything worth remembering, 

when on a voyage; 

(4) Things met with at sea, that are noticed, are sure to 

be recorded in the log. 

Univ. “things met with at sea”; a = entered in log; 
b = mermaids; c = met with by me; d= noticed; 
e= worth remembering. 



1128 


A MISCELLANY 


34 

(1) The only books in this library, that I do not recom¬ 

mend for reading, are unhealthy in tone; 

(2) The bound books are all well-written; 

(3) All the romances are healthy in tone; 

(4) I do not recommend you to read any of the unbound 

books. 

Univ. “books in this library”; a = bound; b= healthy in 
tone; c —recommended by me; d— romances; 
e— well-written. 

35 

(1) No birds, except ostriches, are 9 feet high; 

(2) There are no birds in this aviary that belong to any 

one but me; 

(3) No ostrich lives on mince-pies; 

(4) I have no birds less than 9 feet high. 

Univ. “birds”; a = in this aviary; b= living on mince-pies; 
c=my; d =9 feet high; ostriches. 

36 

(1) A plum-pudding, that is not really solid, is mere por¬ 

ridge; 

(2) Every plum-pudding, served at my table, has been 

boiled in a cloth; 

(3) A plum-pudding that is mere porridge is indistin¬ 

guishable from soup; 

(4) No plum-puddings are really solid, except what are 

served at my table. 

Univ. “plum-puddings”; a =boiled in a cloth; b= dis¬ 
tinguishable from soup; c =mere porridge; d = really 
solid; e =served at my table. 

37 

(1) No interesting poems are unpopular among people of 
real taste; 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC 1129 

(2) No modern poetry is free from affectation; 

(3) All your poems are on the subject of soap-bubbles; 

{4) No affected poetry is popular among people of real 
taste; 

(5) No ancient poem is on the subject of soap-bubbles. 
Univ. “poems”; a~ affected; b = ancient; c = interesting; 
d = on the subject of soap-bubbles; e = popular among 
people of real taste; h — written by you. 

38 

(1) All the fruit at this Show, that fails to get a prize, is 

the property of the Committee; 

(2) None of my peaches have got prizes; 

(3) None of the fruit, sold off in the evening, is unripe; 

(4) None of the ripe fruit has been grown in a hot-house; 

(5) All fruit, that belongs to the Committee, is sold off in 

the evening. 

Univ. “fruit at this Show”; a = belonging to the Com¬ 
mittee; b =getting prizes; c = grown in a hot-house; 
d — my peaches; £=ripe; /&=sold off in the evening. 

39 

(1) Promise-breakers are untrustworthy; 

(2) Wine-drinkers are very communicative; 

(3) A man who keeps his promises is honest; 

(4) No teetotalers are pawnbrokers; 

(5) One can always trust a very communicative person. 

Univ. “persons”; a =honest; b pawnbrokers; 
c=promise-breakers; d = trustworthy; e =very 
communicative; h= wine-drinkers. 

40 

(1) No kitten, that loves fish, is unteachable. 

(2) No kitten without a tail will play with a gorilla; 

(3) Kittens with whiskers always love fish; 

(4) No teachable kitten has green eyes; 



1130 A MISCELLANY 

(5) No kittens have tails unless they have whiskers. 

Univ. “kittens”; a = green-eyed; b= loving fish; 
c = tailed; d = teachable; e =whiskered; 
h = willing to play with a gorilla. 

41 

(1) All the Eton men in this College play cricket; 

(2) None but the Scholars dine at the higher table; 

(3) None of the cricketers row; 

(4) My friends in this College all come from Eton; 

(5) All the Scholars are rowing-men. 

Univ. “men in this College”; a = cricketers; 6= dining at 
the higher table; c = Etonians; d =my friends; 
e = rowing-men; h = Scholars. 

42 

(1) There is no box of mine here that I dare open; 

(2) My writing-desk is made of rose-wood; 

(3) All my boxes are painted, except what are here; 

(4) There is no box of mine that I dare not open, unless 

it is full of live scorpions; 

(5) All my rose-wood boxes are unpainted. 

Univ. “my boxes”; «= boxes that I dare open; 
b =full of .live scorpions; c =here; d =made of rose-wood; 
e = painted; h = writing-desks. 

43 

(1) Gentiles have no objection to pork; 

(2) Nobody who admires pigsties ever reads Hogg’s 

poems; 

(3) No Mandarin knows Hebrew; 

(4) Every one, who does not object to pork, admires pig¬ 

sties; 

( 5 ) No Jew is ignorant of Hebrew. 

Univ. “persons”; a = admiring pigsties; b — Jews; 
c= knowing Hebrew; d= Mandarins; e= objecting to 
pork; h = reading Hogg's poems. 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC 


II3I 


44 

(1) All writers, who understand human nature, are clever; 

(2) No one is a true poet unless he can stir the hearts of 

men; 

(3) Shakespeare wrote “Hamlet”; 

(4) No writer, who does not understand human nature, 

can stir the hearts of men; 

(5) None but a true poet could have written “Hamlet”. 
Univ. “writers”; a = able to stir the hearts of men; 

b = clever; c = Shakespeare; d =true poets; 
e - understanding human nature; h = writer of 
“Hamlet”. 

45 

(1) I despise anything that cannot be used as a bridge; 

(2) Everything, that is worth writing an ode to, would be 

a welcome gift to me; 

(3) A rainbow will not bear the weight of a wheel¬ 

barrow; 

(4) Whatever can be used as a bridge will bear the weight 

of a wheel-barrow; 

(5) I would not take, as a gift, a thing that I despise. 

Univ. “things”; a = able to bear the weight of a wheel¬ 
barrow; b = acceptable to me; c = despised by me; 

d = rainbows; e = useful as a bridge; 
h = worth writing an ode to. 

46 

(1) When I work a Logic-example without grumbling, 

you may be sure it is one that I can understand; 

(2) These Jorites are not arranged in regular order, like 

the examples I am used to; 

(3) No easy example ever makes my head ache; 

( 4 ) I ca’n’t understand examples that are not arranged in 

regular order, like those I am used to; 

(5) I never grumble at an example, unless it gives me a 

headache. 



A MISCELLANY 


1132 

Univ. “Logic-examples worked by me”; a = arranged in 
regular order, like the examples I am used to; b =easy; 
c= grumbled at by me; d- making my head ache; 
e - these Sorites; h = understood by me. 

47 

(1) Every idea of mine, that cannot be expressed as a 

Syllogism, is really ridiculous; 

(2) None of my ideas about Bath-buns are worth writing 

down; 

(3) No idea of mine, that fails to come true, can be ex¬ 

pressed as a Syllogism; 

(4) I never have any really ridiculous idea, that I do not 

at once refer to my solicitor; 

(5) My dreams are all about Bath-buns; 

(6) I never refer any idea of mine to my solicitor, unless 

it is worth writing down. 

Univ. “my idea”; a = able to be expressed as a Syllogism; 
b = about Bath-buns; c = coming true; d = dreams; 
e = really ridiculous; h = referred to my solicitor; 
k = worth writing down. 

48 

(1) None of the pictures here, except the battle-pieces, are 

valuable; 

(2) None of the unframed ones are varnished; 

(3) All the battle-pieces are painted in oils; 

(4) All those that have been sold are valuable; 

(5) All the English ones are varnished; 

(6) All those in frames have been sold. 

Univ. “the pictures here”; a — battle-pieces; b= English; 
c = framed; d = oil-paintings; e =sold; h = valuable; 
k- varnished. 

49 

(1) Animals, that do not kick, are always unexcitable; 

(2) Donkeys have no horns; 

(3) A buffalo can always toss one over a gate; 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC 1133 

(4) No animals that kick are easy to swallow; 

(5) No hornless animal can toss one over a gate; 

(6) All animals are excitable, except buffaloes. 

Univ. "animals”; a = able to toss one over a gate; 
b — buffaloes; c = donkeys; d=z asy to swallow; 
e = excitable; h = homed; k = kicking. 

50 

(1) No one, who is going to a party, ever fails to brush 

his hair; 

(2) No one looks fascinating, if he is untidy; 

(3) Opium-eaters have no self-command; 

(4) Every one, who has brushed his hair, looks fascinating; 

(5) No one wears white kid gloves, unless he is going to 

a party; 

(6) A man is always untidy, if he has no self-command. 
Univ. “persons”; a — going to a party; b = having brushed 
one’s hair; c = having self-command; d = looking fascinat¬ 
ing; e = opium-eaters; h = tidy; k = wearing white kid 

gloves. 

51 

(1) No husband, who is always giving his wife new 

dresses, can be a cross-grained man; 

(2) A methodical husband always comes home for his 

tea; 

(3) No one, who hangs up his hat on the gas-jet, can be a 

man that is kept in proper order by his wife; 

(4) A good husband is always giving his wife new dresses; 

(5) No husband can fail to be cross-grained, if his wife 

does not keep him in proper order; 

(6) An unmethodical husband always hangs up his hat 

on the gas-jet. 

Univ. “husbands”; a = always coming home for his tea; 
b = always giving his wife new dresses; c = cross-grained; 
d =good; e = hanging up his hat on the gas-jet; h = kept in 
proper order; k= methodical. 



H34 


A MISCELLANY 


52 

(1) Everything, not absolutely ugly, may be kept in a 

drawing-room; 

(2) Nothing, that is encrusted with salt, is ever quite dry; 

(3) Nothing should be kept in a drawing-room, unless it 

is free from damp; 

(4) Bathing-machines are always kept near the sea; 

(5) Nothing, that is made of mother-of-pearl, can be 

absolutely ugly; 

(6) Whatever is kept near the sea gets encrusted with salt. 

Univ. "things”; a— absolutely ugly; b = bathing 
machines; c= encrusted with salt; d =kept near the sea; 
e = made of mother-of-pearl; h = quite dry; k = things that 
may be kept in a drawing-room. 

53 

(1) I call no day "unlucky”, when Robinson is civil to 

me; 

(2) Wednesdays are always cloudy; 

(3) When people take umbrellas, the day never turns out 

fine; 

(4) The only days when Robinson is uncivil to me are 

Wednesdays; 

(5) Everybody takes his umbrella with him when it is 

raining; 

(6) My "lucky” days always turn out fine. 

Univ. "days”; a = called by me "lucky”; b= cloudy; 
c = days when people take umbrellas; d = days when 
Robinson is civil to me; £ = rainy; h = turning out fine; 
k = Wednesdays. 

54 

(1) No shark ever doubts that it is well fitted out; 

(2) A fish, that cannot dance a minuet, is contemptible; 

(3) No fish is quite certain that it is well fitted out, unless 

it has three rows of teeth; 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC II 35 

(4) All fishes, except sharks, are kind to children; 

(5) No heavy fish can dance a minuet; 

(6) A fish with three rows of teeth is not to be despised. 
Univ. “fishes”; a = able to dance a minuet; b = certain 
that he is well fitted out; c= contemptible; d = having 

3 rows of teeth; e = heavy; h = kind to children; 
k — sharks. 


55 

(1) All the human race, except my footmen, have a cer¬ 

tain amount of common sense; 

(2) No one, who fives on barley-sugar, can be anything 

but a mere baby; 

(3) None but a hop-scotch player knows what real happi¬ 

ness is; 

(4) No mere baby has a grain of common sense; 

(5) No engine-driver ever plays hop-scotch; 

(6) No footman of mine is ignorant of what true happi¬ 

ness is. 

Univ. “human beings”; a = engine-drivers; b= having 
common sense; c = hop-scotch players; d = knowing what 
real happiness is; e = living on barley-sugar; 
h =mere babies; k =my footmen. 

56 

(1) I trust every animal that belongs to me; 

(2) Dogs gnaw bones; 

(3) I admit no animals into my study, unless they will 

beg when told to do so; 

(4) All the animals in the yard are mine; 

(5) I admit every animal, that I trust, into my study; 

(6) The only animals, that are really willing to beg when 

told to do so, are dogs. 

Univ. “animals”; a = admitted to my study; b = animals 
that I trust; c =dogs; d = gnawing bones; e =in the yard; 
h =my; k = willing to beg when told. 



1136 


A MISCELLANY 


57 

(1) Animals are always mortally offended if I fail to 

notice them; 

(2) The only animals that belong to me are in that field; 

(3) No animal can guess a conundrum, unless it has been 

properly trained in a Board-School; 

(4) None of the animals in that field are badgers; 

(5) When an animal is mortally offended, it always rushes 

about wildly and howls; 

(6) I never notice any animal, unless it belongs to me; 

(7) No animal, that has been properly trained in a 

Board-School, ever rushes about wildly and howls. 
Univ. “animals”; a = able to guess a conundrum; 
b = badgers; c =in that field; d = mortally offended if I fail 
to notice them; e=my, h = noticed by me; k = properly 
trained in a Board-School; Crushing about wildly and 

howling. 

58 

(1) I never put a cheque, received by me, on that file, 

unless I am anxious about it; 

(2) All the cheques received by me, that are not marked 

with a cross, are payable to bearer; 

(3) None of them are ever brought back to me, unless 

they have been dishonoured at the Bank; 

(4) All of them, that are marked with a cross, are for 

amounts of over £100; 

(5) All of them, that are not on that file, are marked “not 

negotiable”; 

(6) No cheque of yours, received by me, has ever been 

dishonoured; 

(7) I am never anxious about a cheque, received by me, 

unless it should happen to be brought back to me; 

(8) None of the cheques received by me, that are marked 

“not negotiable”, are for amounts of over £100. 
Univ. “cheques received by me”; a = brought back to 
me; b= cheques that I am anxious about; c= honoured; 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC 1137 

d = marked with a cross; e = marked “not negotiable”; 
h= on that file; k = over £100; l = payable to bearer; 

m = your. 


59 

(1) All the dated letters in this room are written on blue 

paper; 

(2) None of them are in black ink, except those that are 

written in the third person; 

(3) I have not filed any of them that I can read; 

(4) None of them, that are written on one sheet, are un¬ 

dated; 

(5) All of them, that are not crossed, are in black ink; 

(6) All of them, written by Brown, begin with “Dear 

Sir”; 

(7) All of them, written on blue paper, are filed; 

(8) None of them, written on more than one sheet, are 

crossed; 

(9) None of them, that begin with “Dear Sir”, are written 

in the third person. 

Univ. “letters in this room”; a = beginning with “Dear 
Sir”; b= crossed; c = dated; d = filed; e=in black ink; 
h= in third person; k = letters that I can read; l = on blue 
paper; m = on one sheet; n = written by Brown. 

60 

(1) The only animals in this house are cats; 

(2) Every animal is suitable for a pet, that loves to gaze at 

the moon; 

(3) When I detest an animal, I avoid it; 

(4) No animals are carnivorous, unless they prowl at 

night; 

(5) No cat fails to kill mice; 

(6) No animals ever take to me, except what are in this 

house; 

(7) Kangaroos are not suitable for pets; 

(8) None but carnivora kill mice; 


20 


L.C. 



A MISCELLANY 


1138 

(9) I detest animals that do not take to me; 

(10) Animals, that prowl at night, always love to gaze at 
the moon. 

Univ. “animals”; a —avoided by me; b— carnivora; 
c=cats; d— detested by me; e=in this house; 
h =kangaroos; k =killing mice; l —loving to gaze 
at the moon; prowling at night; n= suitable for pets; 

r= taking to me. 


Answers 

1. Babies cannot manage crocodiles. 

2. Your presents to me are not made of tin. 

3. All my potatoes in this dish are old ones. 

4. My servants never say “shpoonj”. 

5. My poultry are not officers. 

6. None of your sons are fit to serve on a jury. 

7. No pencils of mine are sugar-plums. 

8. Jenkins is inexperienced. 

9. No comet has a curly tail. 

10. No hedge-hog takes in the Times. 

11. This dish is unwholesome. 

12. My gardener is very old. 

13. All humming-birds are small. 

14. No one with a hooked nose ever fails to make money. 

15. No gray ducks in this village wear lace collars. 

16. No jug in this cupboard will hold water. 

17. These apples were grown in the sun. 

18. Puppies, that will not lie still, never care to do wor¬ 

sted-work. 

19. No name in this list is unmelodious. 

20. No M.P. should ride in a donkey-race, unless he has 

perfect self-command. 

21. No goods in this shop, that are still on sale, may be 

carried awa}c 

22. No acrobatic feat, which involves turning a quad¬ 

ruple somersault, is ever attempted in a circus. 



A SELECTION FROM SYMBOLIC LOGIC II 39 

23. Guinea-pigs never really appreciate Beethoven. 

24. No scentless flowers please me. 

25. Showy talkers are not really well-informed. 

26. None but red-haired boys learn Greek in this school. 

27. Wedding-cake always disagrees with me. 

28. Discussions, that go on while Tomkins is in the 

chair, endanger the peacefulness of our Debating- 
Club. 

29. All gluttons, who are children of mine, are unhealthy. 

30. An egg of the Great Auk is not to be had for a song. 

31. No books sold here have gilt edges, unless they are 

priced at 5s. and upwards. 

32. When you cut your finger, you will find Tincture of 

Calendula useful. 

33. I have never come across a mermaid at sea. 

34. All the romances in this library are well-written. 

35. No bird in this aviary lives on mince-pies. 

36. No plum-pudding, that has not been boiled in a cloth, 

can be distinguished from soup. 

37. All your poems are uninteresting. 

38. None of my peaches have been grown in a hot-house. 

39. No pawnbroker is dishonest. 

40. No kitten with green eyes will play with a gorilla. 

41. All my friends dine at the lower table. 

42. My writing-desk is full of live scorpions. 

43. No Mandarin ever reads Hogg’s poems. 

44. Shakespeare was clever. 

45. Rainbows are not worth writing odes to. 

46. These Sorites-examples are difficult. 

47. All my dreams come true. 

48. All the English pictures here are painted in oils. 

49. Donkeys are not easy to swallow. 

50. Opium-eaters never wear white kid gloves. 

51. A good husband always comes home for his tea. 

52. Bathing-machines are never made of mother-of-pearl. 

53. Rainy days are always cloudy. 

54. No heavy fish is unkind to children. 

55. No engine-driver lives on barley-sugar. 



A MISCELLANY 


1140 

56. All the animals in the yard gnaw bones. 

57. No badger can guess a conundrum. 

58. No cheque of yours, received by me, is payable to 

order. 

59. I cannot read any of Brown's letters. 

60. I always avoid a kangaroo. 


RULES FOR COURT CIRCULAR 
(A New Game of Cards for Two or More Players) 
section i. (For Two Players) 


1 

Cut for precedence. Highest is “first-hand”; lowest “deal¬ 
er”. Dealer gives 6 cards to each, one by one, beginning 
with first-hand, and turns up the 13th, which is called 
the “Lead”. It is convenient that the same player should 
be dealer for the whole of each game. 


11 

First-hand then plays a card; then the other player, and 
so on, until 6 cards have been played, when the trick is 
complete, and he who can make (out of the 3 cards he 
has played, with or without the Lead), the best “Line”, 
wins it. 


First hand. 



N.B. The cards in the figure are numbered in the order 
of playing. 







RULES FOR COURT CIRCULAR 


II4I 


III 

A “Line” consists of 2, or all 3, of the cards put down 
by either player, with or without the Lead. In making a 
Line, it does not matter in what order the 3 cards have 
been put down. Lines rank as follows: 

(1) 3, or 4, CARDS, (LEAD included) 

Trio—i.e. 3 of a sort, (e.g. 3 Kings, or 3 Nines.) 

Sequence—i.e. 3, or 4, in Sequence, (e.g. Eight, Nine, 
Ten, Knave.) 

Sympathy—i.e. 3, or 4, Hearts. 

Court—i.e. 3, or 4, Court-cards, (if 4, it is called Court 
Circular.) 

N.B. In this Class a Line of 4 cards beats a similar Line 
of 3. The Lead must not be reckoned in the middle of a 
Sequence. 


(2) 3 CARDS, (LEAD excluded) 


Names as above. 

N.B. In making a Sequence, the Ace may be reckoned 
either with King, Queen, or with Two, Three. 

(3) 2 CARDS, (LEAD excluded) 

Pair—i.e. 2 of a sort. 

Valentine—i.e. 2 Hearts. 

Etiquette—i.e. 2 Court-cards. 

IV 

If both have made Lines of the same kind, he whose 
Line contains the best card wins the trick; and if neither 
has made a Line, he who has played the best card wins it. 
Cards rank as follows: 

(1) Hearts. 

(2) The rest of the pack, in order Aces, Kings, &c. 



A MISCELLANY 


1142 

N.B. If no Hearts have been played, and the highest 
cards on each side are equal, (e.g. if each have played an 
Ace,) they rank in the order Diamonds, Clubs, Spades. 

v 

The winner of a trick chooses, as Lead for the next 
trick, any one of the cards on the table, except the old 
Lead; he then takes the rest, turning them face upwards, 
if he be first-hand, but if not, face downwards; and he 
becomes first-hand for the next trick. 

VI 

The dealer then gives cards to each, one by one, be¬ 
ginning with first-hand, until each hand is made up again 
to 6 cards. 


VII 

At any time during a trick, after the first card of it 
has been played, and before either has played 3 cards, he 
whose turn it is to play may “resign" instead; in which 
case no more cards are played in that trick, and the other 
player wins it and proceeds as in Rule V. But when 
either has played 3 cards, the other must not resign. 

VIII 

When the pack is exhausted neither player may resign. 
The winner of the last trick clears the board. Each then 
reckons up the cards he has won, which count as follows: 


Cards face upwards.2 each. 

downwards ... 1 

Hearts.1 

Court-cards..1 


(so that a Court-Heart, if face upwards, counts 4 alto¬ 
gether.) The winner scores the difference between his 
own and the loser’s marks, the loser scoring nothing. 
Game is 20 or 50. 






CROQUET CASTLES 


1143 


section 11. (For Three or More Players) 

The same rules apply, with the following necessary 
changes. The Lead is placed in the middle; first-hand then 
plays a card; then the player on his left-hand, and so on 
all round, each putting down his 3 cards in a row from 
the Lead towards himself. He who makes the best Line 
wins the trick, and is first-hand for the next trick. At any 
time during a trick, after the first card of it has been 
played, and before any one has played 3 cards, he whose 
turn it is to play may "resign” instead; in which case he 
loses his chance of winning that trick, and the other 
players go on without him. But when any one has 
played 3 cards, no other player may resign. In the case 
where all players but one "resign”, he who is left to the 
last wins the trick. At the end of each game all the play¬ 
ers but the lowest score the difference between their own 
marks and those of the lowest, the lowest scoring nothing. 
Game is 50. 

January, i860. 


CROQUET CASTLES 
(For Five Players ) 

1 

This Game requires the 10 arches, and 5 of the 8 balls 
used in the ordinary game, and, in addition to them, an¬ 
other set of 5 balls, (matching these in colour, but marked 
so as to be distinct from them), and 5 flags, also matching 
them. One set of balls is called "soldiers”; the other, 
"sentinels”. The arches and flags are set up as in a figure, 
making 5 "castles”, and each player has a castle, a soldier, 
and a sentinel; the sentinel’s "post” is half-way between 
the “gate” and the "door” of the castle, and the soldier is 
placed, to begin the game, just within the gate. 



A MISCELLANY 


II 44 

(N.B. The distance from one gate to the next should be 
6 or 8 yards, and from the gate of a castle to the door 4 
yards; and the distance from the door to the flag should 
be equal to the width of the door.) 

11 

The soldiers are played in order, as marked above; 
then the sentinels, in the same order, and so on. Each 
soldier has to “invade” the other 4 castles, in order, (e.g. 
soldier No. 3 has to invade castles Nos. 4, 5, 1, 2,) then to 
re-enter his own, and touch the flag; and whoever does 
this first, wins. To “invade” a castle, he must enter the 
gate, go through the door, then between the door and the 
flag, then out at the gate again: but he cannot enter a 
castle, unless either the sentinel of that castle, or his own 
sentinel, be out of its castle. 

(N.B. No ball can enter or leave a castle, except by 
passing through the gate.) 


in 

If a sentinel touch a soldier, both being in the sentin¬ 
el’s castle, the soldier is “prisoner”; he is replaced (if 
necessary) where he was when touched, the sentinel is 
placed in the gate, and the castle is “fortified”. The pris¬ 
oner cannot move, and nothing can go through the gate, 
till the castle is opened again, which is done either by 
the prisoner’s comrade coming and touching the sentinel 
in the gate, or by the sentinel leaving the gate to go and 
rescue his own comrade: in the former case, both sen¬ 
tinels are replaced at their posts. 

IV 

When a prisoner is set free, he cannot be again taken 
prisoner until after his next turn. 

v 

If a ball touch another (except a prisoner, or a sentinel 
in his castle), the player may, if he likes, replace it where 



CROQUET CASTLES 1145 

it was when touched, and use it to croquet his own with: 
in the excepted cases, he must replace it, but can do no 
more. 


VI 

If a soldier go through an arch, or between a door and 
flag, in his proper course, or if a sentinel go through the 
gate of his castle, the player has another turn. 

VII 

A player whose soldier is a prisoner, plays all his turns 
with his sentinel; and one, whose castle is fortified, with 
his soldier, unless it be taken prisoner, when he must play 
his sentinel to rescue it. 


VIII 

The sentinel of a fortified castle is considered to be in, 
or out of, the castle, as the owner chooses: that is, if he 
wishes to invade a castle, the sentinel of which is within 
it, he may consider his own sentinel as out of its castle 
(which gives him the right of invasion): or, if he wishes 
to go and rescue his soldier, he may consider it as in (so 
that he first plays it through the gate, and then has an¬ 
other turn). 

CH.CH., OXFORD, May 4,1863. 


N.B. This game does not absolutely require more than 
two additional balls, beside those used in the ordinary 
game; these may be Light Blue and Light Green, and 
the 10 balls may be arranged as follows— 


Soldiers 


Sentinels 


BLUE. 

BLACK. 

ORANGE. 

GREEN. 

RED. 


LIGHT BLUE. 
BROWN. 
YELLOW. 
LIGHT GREEN. 
PINK. 



MISCHMASCH 

(A Word-Game for Two Players or Two Sets of Players) 

“Pars pro toto." 

The essence of this game consists in one Player propos¬ 
ing a “nucleus” (i.e. a set of two or more letters, such as 
“gp”, “emo”, “imse”), and in the other trying to find a 
“lawful word” (i.e. a word known in ordinary society, 
and not a proper name), containing it. Thus, “magpie”, 
“lemon”, “himself”, are lawful words containing the nuc¬ 
lei "gp”, emo”, “imse”. 

A nucleus must not contain a hyphen (e.g. for the 
nucleus “erga”, “flower-garden” is not a lawful word). 

Any word, that is always printed with a capital initial 
(e.g. “English”), counts as a proper name. 

RULES 

1. Each thinks of a nucleus, and says “ready” when he 
has done so. When both have spoken, the nuclei are 
named. A Player may set a nucleus without knowing of 
any word containing it. 

2 . When a Player has guessed a word containing the 
nucleus set to him (which need not be the word thought 
of by the Player who set it), or has made up his mind that 
there is no such word, he says “ready”, or “no word”, as 
the case may be: when he has decided to give up trying, 
he says “I resign”. The other must then, within a stated 
time (e.g. 2 minutes), say “ready”, or “no word”, or “I 
resign”, or “not ready”. If he says nothing, he is assumed 
to be “not ready”. 

3. When both have spoken, if the first speaker said 
“ready”, he now names the word he has guessed: if he 
said “no word”, he, who set the nucleus, names, if he 
can, a word containing it. The other Player then proceeds 
in the same way. 


1146 



DOUBLETS 


1147 

4. The Players then score as follows—(N.B. When a 
Player is said to “lose” marks, it means that the other 
scores them,) 

Guessing a word, rightly, scores 1. 

,, ,, wrongly, loses 1. 

Guessing "no word”, rightly, scores 2. 

,, ,, wrongly, loses 2. 

Resigning loses 1. 

This ends the first move. 

5. For every other move, the Players proceed as for 
the first move, except that when a Player is “not ready”, 
or has guessed a word wrongly, he has not a new nucleus 
set to him, but goes on guessing the one in hand, having 
first, if necessary, set a new nucleus for the other Player. 

6. A “resigned” nucleus cannot be set again during 
the same game. If, however, one or more letters be added 
or subtracted, it counts as a new one. 

7. The move, in which either scores 10, is the final 
one; when it is completed, the game is over, and the high¬ 
est score wins, or, if the scores be equal, the game is 
drawn. 

November, 1882. 


DOUBLETS 
A Word-Puzzle 

PREFACE 

On the 29th of March, 1879, the following article ap¬ 
peared in Vanity Fair — 

A NEW PUZZLE 

The readers of Vanity Fair have during the last ten 
years shown so much interest in the Acrostics and Hard 



A MISCELLANY 


II48 

Cases which were first made the object of sustained com¬ 
petition* for prizes in this journal, that it has been sought 
to invent for them an entirely new kind of Puzzle, such 
as would interest them equally with those that have al¬ 
ready been so successful. The subjoined letter from Mr. 
Lewis Carroll will explain itself, and will introduce a 
Puzzle so entirely novel and withal so interesting, that 
the transmutation of the original into the final word of 
the Doublets may be expected to become an occupation 
to the full as amusing as the guessing of the Double Acros¬ 
tics has already proved. 

In order to enable readers to become acquainted with 
the new Puzzle, preliminary Doublets will be given dur¬ 
ing the next three weeks—that is to say, in the present 
number of Vanity Fair and in those of the 5th and 12th 
April. A competition will then be opened—beginning 
with the Doublets published on the 19th April, and in¬ 
cluding all those published subsequently up to and in¬ 
cluding the number of the 26th July—for three prizes, 
consisting respectively of a Proof Album for the first 
and of Ordinary Albums for the second and third 
prizes. 

The rule of scoring will be as follows—A number of 
marks will be apportioned to each Doublet equal to the 
number of letters in the two words given, For example, in 
the instance given below of “Head” and “Tail”, the num¬ 
ber of possible marks to be gained would be eight; and 
this maximum will be gained by each one of those who 
make the chain with the least possible number of changes. 
If it be assumed that in this instance the chain cannot be 
completed with less than the four links given, then those 
that complete it with four links only will receive eight 
marks, while a mark will be deducted for every extra 
link used beyond four. Any competitor, therefore, using 
five links would score seven marks, any competitor using 
eight links would score four, and any using twelve links 
or more would score nothing. The marks gained by each 
competitor will be published each week. 



DOUBLETS 


1149 

DEAR VANITY.—Just a year ago last Christmas, two 
young ladies—smarting under that secret scourge of fem¬ 
inine humanity, the having “nothing to do”—besought 
me to send them “some riddles”. But riddles I had none 
at hand, and therefore set myself to devise some other 
form of verbal torture which should serve the same pur¬ 
pose. The result of my meditations was a new kind of 
Puzzle—new at least to me—which, now that it has been 
fairly tested by a year’s experience and commended by 
many friends, I offer to you, as a newly-gathered nut, to 
be cracked by the omnivorous teeth which have already 
masticated so many of your Double Acrostics. 

The rules of the Puzzle are simple enough. Two words 
are proposed, of the same length; and the puzzle consists 
in linking these together by interposing other words, 
each of which shall differ from the next word in one let¬ 
ter only. That is to say, one letter may be changed in one 
of the given words, then one letter in the word so ob¬ 
tained, and so on, till we arrive at the other given word. 
The letters must not be interchanged among themselves, 
but each must keep to his own place. As an example, the 
word “head” may be changed into “tail” by interposing 
the words “heal, teal, tell, tall”. I call the two given words 
“a Doublet”, the interposed words “Links”, and the en¬ 
tire series “a Chain”, of which I here append an example— 

HEAD 

heal 

teal 

tell 

tall 

TAIL 

It is, perhaps, needless to state that it is de rigueur that 
the links should be English words, such as might be used 
in good society. 

The easiest “Doublets” are those in which the conson¬ 
ants in one word answer to consonants in the other, and 
the vowels to vowels; “head” and “tail” constitute a 



A MISCELLANY 


1150 

Doublet of this kind. Where this is not the case, as in 
“head" and “hare", the first thing to be done is to trans¬ 
form one member of the Doublet into a word whose 
consonants and vowels shall answer to those of the other 
member (e.g. “head, herd, here”, after which there is 
seldom much difficulty in completing the “Chain”. 

I am told there is an American game involving a sim¬ 
ilar principle. I have never seen it, and can only say of 
its inventors, “pereant qui ante nos nostra dixerunt!” 

LEWIS CARROLL 


RULES 

1. The words given to be linked together constitute a 
“Doublet"; the interposed words are the “Links”; and 
the entire series a “Chain”. The object is to complete the 
Chain with the least possible number of Links. 

2. Each word in the Chain must be formed from the 
preceding word by changing one letter in it, and one only. 
The substituted letter must occupy the same place, in 
the word so formed, which the discarded letter occupied 
in the preceding word, and all the other letters must re¬ 
tain their places. 

3. When three or more words are given to be made into 
a Chain, the first and last constitute the “Doublet”. The 
others are called “Set Links”, and must be introduced 
into the Chain in the order in which they are given. A 
Chain of this kind must not contain any word twice over. 

4. No word is admissible as a Link unless it (or, if it 
be an inflection, a word from which it comes) is to be 
found in the following Glossary. 1 Comparatives and su¬ 
perlatives of adjectives and adverbs, when regularly 
formed, are regarded as “inflections” of the positive form, 
and are not given separately: e.g. the word “new” being 
given, it is to be understood that “newer" and “newest” 
are also admissible. But nouns formed from verbs (as 

1 The glossary mentioned here is a list of common English 
words which appeared in the original edition of ‘‘Doublets”. It has 
not been included in this volume. Ed. 



DOUBLETS 


II5I 

“reader” from “read”) are not so regarded, and may not be 
used as Links unless they are to be found in the Glossary. 

METHOD OF SCORING 
ADOPTED IN “VANITY FAIR” 

1. The marks assigned to each Doublet are as follows— 
If it be given without any Set Links, so many marks are 
assigned to it as there are letters in the two words together 
(e.g., a four-letter Doublet would have, eight marks as¬ 
signed to it). If it be given with Set Links, so that the 
Chain is made up of two or more portions, so many marks 
are assigned to it as would have been assigned if each 
portion had been a separate Chain (e.g., a four-letter 
Doublet which has two Set Links, so that the Chain is 
made up of three portions, would have twenty-four 
marks assigned to it). 

2. Each competitor, who completes the Chain with 
the least possible number of Links, will receive the full 
number of marks assigned; and each who uses more than 
the least possible number of Links will lose a mark for 
every additional Link. 

3. Each competitor is required to send his three Chains, 
with his signature attached, written on one piece of paper. 

4. The Editor of Vanity Fair will be glad to receive 
any suggestions, both as to words which it seems desirable 
to omit, and as to omitted words which it seems desirable 
to insert: but any words proposed for insertion or for omis¬ 
sion should he exhibited as a Link between two other words. 

5. Alterations will not be made in this Glossary during 
any competition, but will be duly announced before the 
commencement of a new competition, so that those who 
already possess copies will be able to correct them, and 
will not be obliged to buy a new edition. 

“Vanity Fair” Office, 

13, Tavistock Street, 

Covent Garden, 

LONDON. 



1152 


A MISCELLANY 


DOUBLETS ALREADY SET 
IN “VANITY fair” 


March 29: 

Drive PIG into STY. 

Raise FOUR to FIVE. 

Make WHEAT into BREAD. 

April 5: 

Dip PEN into INK. 

Touch CHIN with NOSE. 

Change TEARS into SMILE. 

April 12: 

Change WET to DRY. 

Make HARE into SOUP. 

PITCH TENTS. 

April 19: 

Cover EYE with LID. 

Prove PITY to be GOOD. 

STEAL COINS. 

April 26: 

Make EEL into PIE. 

Turn POOR into RICH. 

Prove RAVEN to be MISER. 

May 3: 

Change OAT to RYE. 

Get WOOD from TREE. 

Prove GRASS to be GREEN. 

May 10: 

Evolve MAN from APE. 

Change CAIN into ABEL. 

Make FLOUR into BREAD. 

May 17: 

Make TEA HOT. 

Run COMB into HAIR. 

Prove a ROGUE to be a BEAST. 

May 24: 

Change ELM into OAK. 

Combine ARMY and NAVY. 
Place BEARS on SHELF. 

May 31: 

HOOK FISH. 

QUELL a BRAVO. 

Stow FURIES in BARREL. 



A POSTAL PROBLEM 1153 

June 7: BUY an ASS. 

Get COAL from MINE. 

Pay COSTS in PENCE. 

June 14: Raise ONE to TWO. 

Change BLUE to PINK. 

Change BLACK to WHITE. 

June 21: Change FISH to BIRD. 

Sell SHOES for CRUST. 

Make KETTLE HOLDER. 


A POSTAL PROBLEM 
{June, 1891) 

The Rule, for Commissions chargeable on overdue Postal 
Orders, is given in the “Post Office Guide” in these words, 
(it is here divided, for convenience of reference, into 3 
clauses)— 

(a) After the expiration of 3 months from the last 
day of the month of issue, a Postal Order will be payable 
only on payment of a Commission, equal to the amount 
of the original poundage; 

(b) with the addition (if more than 3 months have 
elapsed since the said expiration) of the amount of the 
original poundage for every further period of 3 months 
which has so elapsed; 

(c) and for every portion of any such period of 3 
months over and above every complete period. 

You are requested to answer the following questions, 
in reference to a Postal Order for 10/-. (on which the 
“original poundage” would be id.) issued during the 
month of January, so that the 1st “period” would con- 


A MISCELLANY 


1154 

sist of the months February, March, April; the 2nd would 
consist of the months May, June, July; and the 3rd would 
consist of the months August, September, October. 

(1) Supposing the Rule to consist of clause (a) only, 

on what day would a “Commission” begin to be charge¬ 
able? ( ) 

(2) What would be its amount? ( ) 

(3) Supposing the Rule to consist of clauses (a) and 

(b), on what day would the lowest “Commission” begin 
to be chargeable? ( ) 

(4) What would be its amount? ( ) 

(5) On what day would a larger “Commission” (be¬ 
ing the sum of 2 “Commissions”) begin to be chargeable? 
( ) 

(6) What would be its amount? ( ) 

(7) On what day would a yet larger “Commission” 

begin to be chargeable? ( ) 

(8) What would be its amount ? ( ) 

(9) Taking the Rule as consisting of all 3 clauses, in 

which of the above-named 3 “periods” does clause (c) 
first begin to take effect? ( ) 

(10) Which day, of any “period”, is the earliest on 

which it can be said that a "portion” of the "period” has 
elapsed? ( ) 

(11) On what day would the lowest “Commission” 


begin to be chargeable? ( ) 

(12) What would be its amount? ( ) 

(13) On what day would a larger “Commission” be¬ 
gin to be chargeable? ( ) 

(14) What would be its amount? ( ) 

(15) On what day would a yet larger “Commission” 

begin to be chargeable? ( ) 

(16) What would be its amount? ( ) 

Signature. 

Date... 





A POSTAL PROBLEM 


1155 


SUPPLEMENT 

The Rule is given, below, in a form which exhibits its 
grammatical construction— 


(a.i) After the expiration of 3 months 
from the last day of the month of 
issue, a Postal Order will be 
payable only on payment 


of 

(a. 2) a Commission, equal 
to the amount of the 
original poundage 


(b.i) with the addition (if 
more than 3 months have 
elapsed since the said 
expiration) 
of 

the amount of the original 
poundage 


for 

(b.2) every further 
period of 3 months 
which has so 
elapsed 


and for 

(c.) every portion of 
any such period of 
3 months over and 
above every com¬ 
plete period. 



THE ALPHABET-CIPHER 


ABCDEFGHI J K LMNOPQR S TUVWXYZ 



ABC DEFGH I JKLMNOPQ RS TUVWXYZ 


EXPLANATION 

Each column of this table forms a dictionary of symbols 
representing the alphabet: thus, in the A column, the 

1156 

















































THE ALPHABET-CIPHER II57 

symbol is the same as the letter represented; in the B col¬ 
umn, A is represented by B, B by C, and so on. 

To use the table, some word or sentence should be 
agreed on by two correspondents. This may be called the 
"key-word”, or "key-sentence”, and should be carried in 
the memory only. 

In sending a message, write the key-word over it, letter 
for letter, repeating it as often as may be necessary: the 
letters of the key-word will indicate which column is to 
be used in translating each letter of the message, the sym¬ 
bols for which should be written underneath: then copy 
out the symbols only, and destroy the first paper. It will 
now be impossible for any one, ignorant of the key-word, 
to decipher the message, even with the help of the table. 

For example, let the key-word be vigilance, and the 
message "meet me on Tuesday evening at seven”, the 
first paper will read as follows— 

vigilancevigilancevigilancevi 

meetmeontuesdayeveningatseven 

hmkbxebpxpmyllyrxiiqtoltfgzzv 

The second will contain only "hmkbxebpxpmyl 
1 y r x i i q t o 11 f g z z v”. 

The receiver of the message can, by the same process, 
retranslate it into English. 

N.B.—If this table be lost, it can easily be written out 
from memory, by observing that the first symbol in each 
column is the same as the letter naming the column, and 
that they are continued downwards in alphabetical order. 
Of course it would only be necessary to write out the par¬ 
ticular columns required by the key-word: such a paper, 
however, should not be preserved, as it would afford 
means for discovering the key-word. 



INTRODUCTION TO 
“THE LOST PLUM CAKE" 


(In i8gy Lewis Carroll wrote an introduction to “The Lost 
Plum Cake”, a “tale for tiny hoys” by E. G. Wilcox. It is 
completely in character: in its devotion to children, its advice 
to mothers, its engaging whimsicality, and its childlike pre¬ 
occupation with the cover. It is a fitting piece for the end of 
this hook because it is the last thing he ever wrote for his beloved 
children. He died soon afterwards.) 

The writer of the Introduction to a book, who is not him¬ 
self the author of the book, enjoys one singular privilege. 
—he can discuss its merits with a freedom that very few 
authors would venture to use: since, however sweet the 
“blowing one’s own trumpet” may sound to the enrap¬ 
tured trumpeter, it is apt to pall on other ears. Let me, 
then, avail myself of this privilege by saying that I be¬ 
lieve Mrs. Egerton Allen has a very special talent for writ¬ 
ing books for very young children. Her dialogues have 
all the vividness of a photograph; and I feel sure that all 
real children—children who have not been spoiled by too 
much notice, and thus taught to give themselves the airs 
of little men and women—will like to read the story of 
tiny “Joey”, and will enjoy the clever and sympathetic 
sketches with which Mrs. Shute has adorned it. It is, I 
think, a real loss to the thousands of child-readers, for 
whom so many charming books have been written, that 
Mrs. Allen’s first little book—“Little Humphrey’s Ad¬ 
venture”—has been allowed by the Publishers, who hold 
the copyright of it, to go out of print. It is a thorough 
child’s book, and I trust the S.P.C.K. may ere long see 
their way to issuing another edition of it. 

But the writer of this Introduction is not alone in his 
good fortune: the reader of this little book has also a 
singular privilege at his command, in connection with 
the cover, which was designed for it by Miss E. Gertrude 

1158 



“the lost plum cake” 1159 

Thomson. Holding the book at the middle point of each 
side, and turn it about till the light (which should 
come from behind him) causes what look like little hills 
on the red cover to glitter, he can then fidget it about— 
he will soon catch the knack—till the gold ornamentation 
seems to lift itself a good half-inch off the cover; and he 
can easily persuade his eye, if not his intellect, to believe 
that, in turning the book about, he is causing the gold to 
cover now one part of the red and now another. It is a 
really curious optical illusion. 

Let me seize this opportunity of saying one earnest 
word to the mothers into whose hands this little book 
may chance to come, who are in the habit of taking their 
children to church with them. However well and rever¬ 
ently those dear little ones have been taught to behave, 
there is no doubt that so long a period of enforced quiet¬ 
ude is a severe tax on their patience. The hymns, per¬ 
haps, tax it least: and what a pathetic beauty there is in 
the sweet fresh voices of the children, and how earnestly 
they sing! I took a little girl of six to church with me one 
day: they had told me she could hardly read at all—but 
she made me find all her places for her! And afterwards I 
said to her elder sister, “What made you say Barbara 
couldn’t read? Why, I heard her joining in, all through 
the hymn!’’ And the little sister gravely replied, “She 
knows the tunes, but not the words.” Well, to return to 
my subject—children in church. The lessons and the pray¬ 
ers, are not wholly beyond them: often they can catch 
little bits that come within the range of their small minds. 
But the sermons! It goes to one’s heart to see, as I so 
often do, little darlings of five or six years old, forced to 
sit still through a weary half-hour, with nothing to do, and 
not one word of sermon that they can understand. Most 
heartily can I sympathize with the little charity-girl, who 
is said to have written to some friend, “I thinks, when I 
grows up, I’ll never go to church no more. I thinks I’se 
getting sermons enough to last me all my life!’’ But need 
it be so? Would it be so very irreverent to let your child 



n6o 


A MISCELLANY 


have a story-book to read during the sermon, to while 
away that tedious half-hour, and to make church-going a 
bright and happy memory, instead of rousing the thought 
“I’ll never go to church no more?’’ I think not. For my 
part, I should love to see the experiment tried. I am quite 
sure it would be a success. My advice would be to keep 
some books for that special purpose—I would call such 
books “Sunday-treats”—and your little boy or girl would 
soon learn to look forward with eager hope to that half- 
hour, once so tedious. If I were the preacher, dealing with 
some subject too hard for the little ones, I should love to 
see them all enjoying their picture-books. And if this little 
book should ever come to be used as a “Sunday-treat’’ for 
some sweet baby-reader, I don’t think it could serve a. 
better purpose. 


Christmas, i8gj. 


LEWIS CARROLL 



INDEX OF FIRST LINES 
OF VERSE 


A boat, beneath a sunny sky, 250 

A is for [Acland], who’d physic the Masses, 826 

Alas! she would not hear my prayer! 724, 1110 

All in the golden afternoon, 11 

A Mother’s breast, 843 

And cannot pleasures, while they last, 775 

“And did you really walk,” said I, 748 

Around my lonely hearth to-night, 840 

“Are you deaf. Father William ?” the young man said. 

As curly-headed Jemmy was sleeping in bed, 735 

A short direction, 704 

As I was sitting on the hearth, 707 

As one who strives a hill to climb, 760 

A stick I found that weighed two pound, 733 

Ay, ’twas here, on this spot, 795 

Beautiful Soup, so rich and green, 103 
Beloved Pupil! Tamed by thee, 881 
Beneath the waters of the sea, 727 
Blow, blow your trumpets till they crack, 807 

Child of the pure unclouded brow, 123 

“Don’t they consult the ‘Victims’, though?” 756 

Dreaming of apples on a wall, 733 

Dreams, that elude the Maker’s frenzied grasp—, 459 

Empress of Art, for thee I twine, 804 

Fair stands the ancient Rectory, 712 

“First, the fish must be caught,” 242 

Five fathom square the Belfry frowns, 1034 

Five little girls, of Five, Four, Three, Two, One, 789 

Five seeing, and seven blind, 736 

1161 



1162 index of first lines of verse 

From his shoulder Hiawatha, 768 
From sackcloth couch the Monk arose, 293 

Girt with a boyish garb for boyish task, 679 

Hark, said the dying man, and sighed, 856 

“Heard ye the arrow hurtle in the sky?” 816 

He looked again, and found it was, 631 

“Here I bee, and here I byde," 1004 

Here’s to the Freshman of bashful eighteen! 1053 

He saw her once, and in the glance, 849 

He shouts amain, he shouts again, 837 

He steps so lightly to the land, 404 

He thought he saw a Banker’s Clerk, 306 

He thought he saw a Buffalo, 301 

He thought he saw a Coach-and-Four, 318 

He thought he saw a Garden-Door, 344 

He thought he saw a Kangaroo, 314 

He thought he saw an Albatross, 342 

He thought he saw an Argument, 632 

He thought he saw an Elephant, 294 

He thought he saw a Rattlesnake, 303 

He trilled a carol fresh and free, 776 

His barque had perished in the storm, 996 

“How shall I be a poet?” 790 

Hush-a-by lady, in Alice’s lap! 236 

I charm in vain: for never again, 842 

I dreamt I dwelt in marble halls, 725 

If such a thing had been my thought, 706 

I have a fairy by my side, 700 

I have a horse—a ryghte goode horse—, 768 

I’ll tell thee everything I can, 225 

I love the stillness of the wood, 860 

"I’m EMInent in RHYME!” she said, 843 

I met an aged, aged man, 727 

I never loved a dear Gazelle—, 788 

In her eyes is the living light, 861 

In Shylock’s bargain for the flesh was found, 735 

In stature the Manlet was dwarfish—, 605 

In the dark silence of an ancient room, 852 

"In these degenerate days,” we oft hear said, 736 



INDEX OF FIRST LINES OF VERSE II 63 

In winter, when the fields are white, 200 

I painted her a gushing thing, 811 

Is all our Life, then, but a dream, 253 

I sing a place wherein agree, 828 

Is it the glow of conscious pride—, 1031 

I stood within the gate, 872 

"It is the lawyer’s daughter,” 839 

John gave his brother James a box, 733 

"Just the place for a Snark!” the Bellman cried, 680 

King Fisher courted Lady Bird—, 479 

"Ladies and Gentlemen” seems stiff and cold, 737 

Lady Clara Vere de Vere, 765 

Lady dear, if Fairies may, 13 

Let craft, ambition, spite, 316 

Little Birds are dining, 653 

Little maidens, when you look, 827 

"Look on the Quadrangle of Christ Church, squarely, for is it 
not a Square?” 1035 
Lorenzo dwelt at Heighington, 1002 
Love-lighted eyes, that will not start, 835 

Maidens, if a maid you meet, 833 

"Maidens! if you love the tale,” 834 

Maiden, though thy heart may quail, 836 

Man naturally loves delay, 701 

Matilda Jane, you never look, 509 

Methought I walked a dismal place, 705 

Museum! loveliest building of the plain, 823 

"My First—but don’t suppose,” he said, 745 

My First is singular at best, 806 

My first lends his aid when I plunge into trade, 842 

"My mother bids me bind my hair,” 811 

Oh, dear beyond our dearest dreams, 384 
"Oh, do not forget the day when we met,” 809 
"Oh pudgy podgy pup!” 838 
"Oh, when I was a little Ghost,” 752 
"One thousand pounds per annum,” 569 
One winter night, at half-past nine, 741 



1164 INDEX OF FIRST LINES OF VERSE 

“Only a woman’s hair!” Fling it aside! 868 
Our Latin books, in motley row, 876 
Our Willie had been sae lang awa’, 1041 

“Peter is poor,” said noble Paul, 331 
Puck has fled the haunts of men, 877 

Rise, oh, rise! The daylight dies, 367 
Round the wondrous globe I wander wild, 832 

Said the Moon to the Sun, 734 

Say, what is the spell, when her fledgelings are cheeping, 624 
See! There are tears upon her face—, 870 
“Seek ye Love, ye fairy-sprites?” 837 
Seven blind of both eyes, 734 

Shall soldiers tread the murderous path of war, 737 

“She is gone by the Hilda,” 722 

She’s all my fancy painted him, 723 

“Sister, sister, go to bed!” 702 

Speak roughly to your little boy, 62 

That salmon and sole Puss should think very grand, 735 

The air is bright with hues of light, 805 

The day was wet, the rain fell souse, 709 

The elder and the younger knight, 925 

The ladye she stood at her lattice high, 797 

The light was faint, and soft the air, 863 

The morn was bright, the steeds were light, 867 

The night creeps onward, sad and slow, 875 

There are certain things—as, a spider, a ghost, 766 

There be three Badgers on a mossy stone, 383 

There was an old farmer of Readall, 702 

There was an ancient City, stricken down, 802 

There was a Pig, that sat alone, 329 

There was a young lady of station, 843 

There w$re two brothers at Twyford school, 716 

The royal MAB, dethroned, discrowned, 836 

The sun was shining on the sea, 168 

The Youth at Eve had drunk his fill, 721 

They passed beneath the College gate, 812 

They told me you had been to her, 115 

Three children (their names were so fearful, 831 



INDEX OF FIRST LINES OF VERSE 1165 

Three little maidens weary of the rail, 828 

Three little maids, one winter day, 830 

Three sisters at breakfast were feeding the cat, 734 

’Tis a melancholy song, and it will not keep you long, 730 

'Tis the voice of the Lobster: I heard him declare, 101 

To the Looking-Glass world it was Alice that said, 239 

'Twas brillig, and the slithy toves, 140 

Tweedledum and Tweedledee, 166 

Twinkle, twinkle, little bat! 72 

’Twixt “Perhaps” and “May Be”, 735 

Two little girls near London dwell, 833 

Two thieves went out to steal one day, 832 

Were I to take an iron gun, 703 

What hand may wreathe thy natal crown, 838 

What is most like a bee in May? 733 

“What’s this?” I pondered. “Have I slept?” 764 

“What though the world be cross and crooky ? 995 

When . a . y and I. a told . a ., ie they’d seen a, 830 

When Maggie once to Oxford came, 844 

When midnight mists are creeping, 841 

When on the sandy shore I sit, 793 

“Wiffie! I’m sure that something is the matter,” 739 

With saddest music all day long, 772 

“Will you walk a little faster?” said a whiting to a snail, 98 

Written by Maggie B-, 848 

"You are old, Father William,” the young man said, 50 
Ytte wes a mirke an dreiry cave, 707 



