WlliBllillllWHBSfeaiiawW 


THE  FUTURE  EXPRESS 

"Yes,  gentlemen,"  continued  the  orator,  "in  spite  of  the  opinions 
of  certain  narrow-minded  people,  who  would  shut  up  the  human  race 
upon  this  globe,  as  within  some  magic  circle  which  it  must  never 
outstep,  we  shall  one  day  travel  to  the  moon,  the  planets,  and  the  stars, 
with  the  same  facility,  rapidity,  and  certainty  as  we  now  make  the 
voyage  from  Liverpool  to  New  York !  Distance  is  but  a  relative  ex- 
pression, and  must  end  by  being  reduced  to  zero." 

The  assembly,  strongly  predisposed  as  they  were  in  favor  of  the 
French  hero,  were  staggered  at  this  bold  theory.  Michel  Arden  per- 
ceived the  fact. 

"Gentlemen,"  he  continued,  with  a  pleasant  smile,  "you  do  not 
seem  quite  convinced.  Very  good  !  Let  us  reason  the  matter  out.  Do 
you  know  how  long  it  would  take  for  an  express  train  to  reach  the 
moon?  Three  hundred  days;  no  more!  And  what  is  that ?  The  dis- 
tance is  no  more  than  nine  times  the  circumference  of  the  earth." 
— Page  205. 


aaaiiixs 


anotniqo   sdt  io  aiiqa  ni"   i 
i/DBt  n«rrmrf   orfj   qu    jryrf8  h 

,p.is.ia  sdi  beta  ,gie< 


llo 


si** 


vj 


U 


e; 


-A 


pn: 


H 
Lj 


EDITED  BY 

CHARLES  F.  HORNE,  Ph.D. 

Professor  of  English,    College  of  the  City  of  New  York 
Author  of  "The  Technique  of  the  Novel,"  etc. 


Vincent  Parke  and  Company 
new  york         : :    : :         london 


Copyright,  1911, 
by  Vincent  Parke  and  Company. 


CONTENTS 

Volume  Three 

PAGE 

Introduction „        .        1 

Adventures  of  Captain  Hatteras 

The  Desert  of  Ice  .....  3 
A  Trip  from  the  Earth  to  the  Moon  .  .133 
A  Tour  of  the  Moon 2*3 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

Voujme  Three 

PAGE 

The  Future  Express       ....        Frontispiece 

"Fire!" 144 

The  Reversal  op  Gravitation      ....     288 


vii 

/ 


INTRODUCTION  TO  VOLUME  THREE 

HE  Adventures  of  Captain  Hatter  as,"  made 
popular  by  the  first  half,  or  book,  of  the  tale, 
were  continued  and  concluded  in  the  "Maga- 
zine of  Adventure  "  by  "  The  Desert  of  Ice." 
It  is  in  this  second  book  of  Captain  Hatteras 
that  Verne  struck  again  the  bolder  note  of  imagination  and 
creation.  Here  the  daring  explorers  are  represented  as 
actually  attaining  the  pole;  and  the  bold  inventions  of  what 
they  saw  and  did,  rising  to  the  startling  climax  of  the  vol- 
cano and  the  madman's  climb,  are  led  up  to  through  such 
a  well-managed,  well-constructed  and  convincing  story,  that 
many  critics  have  selected  this  in  its  turn  as  the  most  power- 
ful of  Verne's  works. 

It  is  notable  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  open  sea  and 
the  volcano,  the  world  which  our  author  here  pentrates  in 
imagination,  coincides  closely  with  that  which  Peary  has 
discovered  to  exist  in  reality.  Here  are  the  same  barren 
lands,  the  same  weary  sledge  journey,  the  same  locations  of 
land  and  sea,  the  "red  snow,"'  the  open  leads  in  the  ice. 
Verne's  predictions,  wild  as  they  sometimes  seem,  were  all 
so  carefully  studied  that  they  shoot  most  close  to  truth. 

"  The  Desert  of  Ice  "  was  followed  by  the  two  other  re- 
markable tales  contained  in  the  present  volume,  "A  Trip 
from  the  Earth  to  the  Moon,"  and  "  A  Tour  of  the  Moon." 
These,  though  published  as  separate  volumes  in  1865,  really 
constitute  a  single  story.  They  are  thus  like  the  two  books 
of  Captain  Hatteras,  examples  of  that  peculiar  system  of 
nomenclature  which  makes  the  titles  of  our  author's  books 
so  confusing  and  misleading.  It  became  quite  the  pub- 
lisher's custom,  especially  among  Verne's  earlier  books,  to 
issue  a  first  volume,  wholly  incomplete,  under  one  name, 
th~en  a  second  section  or  volume  of  the  tale  under  another 


2  INTRODUCTION 

name;  and  then  to  reissue  the  two,  or  maybe  three,  combined 

under  a  new  and  entirely  different  title. 

"  A\  Trip  from  the  Earth  to  the  Moon  in  97  hours,  13 
minutes  and  20  seconds,"  to  give  the  first  book  of  the  story 
its  full  length  original  name,  plays  even  more  boldly  with 
science  than  did  the  "  Journey  to  the  Center  of  the  Earth." 
Yet  the  theories  back  of  the  great  gun  which  shoots  the  ad- 
venturers into  space,  are  sound.  "And  what  a  vivid  realisa- 
tion is  given  of  the  meaning  of  these  vast  astronomical  dis- 
tances and  forces.  Says  one  of  our  leading  scientific  peri- 
odicals, speaking  of  this  book,  "  The  time  at  which  the  pro- 
jectile was  to  be  shot  out  of  the  cannon  is  correctly  fixed  on 
true  astronomical  grounds,  and  the  reader  who  follows  its 
flight  will  have  a  more  concrete  idea  of  and  interest  in  what 
gravitation  is  and  does  than  from  half  a  dozen  text-books."' 

As  to  the  discoveries  made  by  the  explorers  in  the  second 
book  of  the  tale,  it  is  noteworthy  that  here  Verne  has  again 
restrained  himself,  instead  of  plunging  blindly  into  inven- 
tions as  a  less  conscientious  romancer  might  easily  have 
done.  His  picture  of  the  moon  is  hard  and  cold,  confined  to 
just  what  astronomers  actually  know  or  closely  surmise. 
He  brings  the  views  and  visions  of  the  scientist  into  a  field 
usually  abandoned  to  the  fooleries  of  extravaganza. 


Adventures  of  Captain  Hatteras 

BOOK  II 

The  Desert  of  Ice 


CHAPTER    I 

THE  DOCTOR'S  INVENTORY 

T  was  a  bold  project  of  Hatteras  to  push  his 
way  to  the  North  Pole,  and  gain  for  his 
country  the  honor  and  glory  of  its  discovery. 
But  he  had  done  all  that  lay  in  human  power 
now,  and,  after  having  struggled  for  nine 
months  against  currents  and  tempests,  shat- 
tering icebergs  and  breaking  through  almost  insurmount- 
able barriers,  amid  the  cold  of  an  unprecedented  winter, 
after  having  outdistanced  all  his  predecessors  and  accom- 
plished half  his  task,  he  suddenly  saw  all  his  hopes  blasted. 
The  treachery,  or  rather  the  despondency,  of  his  worn- 
out  crew,  and  the  criminal  folly  of  one  or  two  leading  spir- 
its among  them,  had  left  him  and  his  little  band  of  men 
in  a  terrible  situation — helpless  in  an  icy  desert,  two  thou- 
sand five  hundred  miles  away  from  their  native  land,  and 
without  even  a  ship  to  shelter  them. 

However,  the  courage  of  Hatteras  was  still  undaunted. 
The  three  men  who  were  left  him  were  the  best  on  board 
his  brig,  and  while  they  remained  he  might  venture  to  hope. 

After  the  cheerful,  manly  words  of  the  captain,  the  Doc- 
tor felt  the  best  thing  to  be  done  was  to  look  their  pros- 
pects fairly  in  the  face,  and  know  the  exact  state  of  things. 
Accordingly,  leaving  his  companions,  he  stole  away  alone 
down  to  the  scene  of  the  explosion. 

Of  the  Forward,  the  brig  that  had  been  so  carefully 
built  and  had  become  so  dear,  not  a  vestige  remained. 
Shapeless  blackened  fragments,  twisted  bars  of  iron,  cable 
ends  still  smouldering,  and  here  and  there  in  the  distance 
spiral  wreaths  of  smoke,  met  his  eye  on  all  sides.  His 
cabin  and  all  his  precious  treasures  were  gone;  his  books, 
and  instruments,  and  collections  reduced  to  ashes.     As  he 


4  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

stood  thinking  mournfully  of  his  irreparable  loss,  he  was 
joined  by  Johnson,  who  grasped  his  offered  hand  in  speech- 
less sorrow. 

"  What's  to  become  of  us?  "  asked  the  Doctor. 

"  Who  can  tell !  "  was  the  old  sailor's  reply. 

"  Anyhow,"  said  Clawbonny,  "  do  not  let  us  despair. 
Let  us  be  men !  " 

"Yes,  Mr.  Clawbonny,  you  are  right.  Now  is  the  time 
to  show  our  mettle.  We  are  in  a  bad  plight,  and  how  to 
get  out  of  it,  that  is  the  question." 

"  Poor  old  brig !  "  exclaimed  the  Doctor.  "  I  had  grown 
so  attached  to  her.  I  loved  her  as  one  loves  a  house 
where  he  has  spent  a  lifetime." 

"Ay!  it's  strange  what  a  hold  those  planks  and  beams 
get  on  a  fellow's  heart." 

"And  the  long-boat — is  that  burnt?"  asked  the  Doctor. 

"  No,  Mr.  Clawbonny.  Shandon  and  his  gang  have  car- 
ried it  off." 

"And  the  pirogue?" 

"Shivered  into  a  thousand  pieces?  Stop.  Do  you  see 
those  bits  of  sheet-iron?     That  is  all  that  remains  of  it." 

"Then  we  have  nothing  but  the  Halkett-boat ? " 

"  Yes,  we  have  that  still,  thanks  to  your  idea  of  taking 
it  with  you." 

"  That  isn't  much,"  said  the  Doctor. 

"Oh,     those     base     traitors!"     exclaimed     Johnson. 

"  Johnson,"  returned  the  Doctor,  gently,  "  we  must  not 
forget  how  sorely  they  have  been  tried.  Only  the  best 
remain  good  in  the  evil  day;  few  can  stand  trouble.  Let 
us  pity  our  fellow-sufferers,  and  not  curse  them." 

For  the  next  few  minutes  both  were  silent,  and  then 
Johnson  asked  what  had  become  of  the  sledge. 

"  We  left  it  about  a  mile  off,"  was  the  reply. 

"In  charge  of  Simpson?" 

"  No,  Simpson  is  dead,  poor  fellow !  " 

"  Simpson  dead !  " 

"  Yes,  his  strength  gave  way  entirely,  and  he  first  sank." 

"Poor  Simpson!  And  yet  who  knows  if  he  isn't  rather 
to  be  envied  ?  " 

"  But,  for  the  dead  man  we  have  left  behind,  we  have 
brought  back  a  dying  one." 

"A  dying  man?" 


THE   DOCTOR'S   INVENTORY  5 

"  Yes,  Captain  Altamont."  And  in  a  few  words  he  in- 
formed Johnson  of  their  discovery. 

"An  American!"  said  Johnson,  as  the  recital  was 
ended. 

"Yes,  everything  goes  to  prove  that.  But  I  wonder 
what  the  Porpoise  was,  and  what  brought  her  in  these 
seas  ?  " 

"  She  rushed  on  to  her  ruin  like  the  rest  of  foolhardy 
adventurers ;  but,  tell  me,  did  you  find  the  coal  ?  " 

The  Doctor  shook  his  head  sadly. 

"  No  coal !  not  a  vestige !  No,  we  did  not  even  get  as 
far  as  the  place  mentioned  by  Sir  Edward  Belcher ! " 

"  Then  we  have  no  fuel  whatever  ?  "  said  the  old  sailor. 

"  No." 

"  And  no  provisions  ?  " 

"  No." 

"  And  no  ship  to  make  our  way  back  to  England  ?  " 

It  required  courage  indeed  to  face  these  gloomy  realities, 
but  after  a  moment's  silence,  Johnson  said  again : 

"  Well,  at  any  rate  we  know  exactly  how  we  stand. 
The  first  thing  to  be  done  now  is  to  make  a  hut,  for  we 
can't  stay  long  exposed  to  this  temperature." 

"  Yes,  we'll  soon  manage  that  with  Bell's  help,"  replied 
the  Doctor.  "  Then  we  must  go  and  find  the  sledge,  and 
bring  back  the  American,  and  have  a  consultation  with 
Hatteras." 

"  Poor  captain,"  said  Johnson,  always  forgetting  his 
own  troubles,  "  how  he  must  feel  it !  " 

Clawbonny  and  Bell  found  Hatteras  standing  motion- 
less, his  arms  folded  in  his  usual  fashion.  He  seemed 
gazing  into  space,  but  his  face  had  recovered  its  calm,  self- 
possessed  expression.  His  faithful  dog  stood  beside  him, 
like  his  master,  apparently  insensible  to  the  biting  cold, 
though  the  temperature  was  32 °  below  zero. 

Bell  lay  on  the  ice  in  an  almost  inanimate  condition. 
Johnson  had  to  take  vigorous  measures  to  rouse  him,  but 
at  last,  by  dint  of  shaking  and  rubbing  him  with  snow,  he 
succeeded. 

"  Come,  Bell,"  he  cried,  "  don't  give  way  like  this.  Ex- 
ert yourself,  my  man;  we  must  have  a  talk  about  our  sit- 
uation, and  we  need  a  place  to  put  our  heads  in.  Come 
and  help  me,  Bell.     You  haven't  forgotten  how  to  make 


6  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

a  snow  hut,  have  you?  There  is  an  iceberg  all  ready  to 
hand;  we've  only  got  to  hollow  it  out.  Let's  set  to  work; 
we  shall  find  that  is  the  best  remedy  for  us." 

Bell  tried  to  shake  off  his  torpor  and  help  his  comrade, 
while  Mr.  Clawbonny  undertook  to  go  and  fetch  the 
sledge  and  the  dogs. 

"Will  you  go  with  him,  captain?"  asked  Johnson. 

"No,  my  friend,"  said  Hatteras,  in  a  gentle  tone,  "if 
the  doctor  will  kindly  undertake  the  task.  Before  the  day 
ends  I  must  come  to  some  resolution,  and  I  need  to  be 
alone  to  think.  Go.  Do  meantime  whatever  you  think 
best.     I  will  deal  with  the  future." 

Johnson  went  back  to  the  Doctor,  and  said :  "  It's  very 
strange,  but  the  captain  seems  quite  to  have  got  over  his 
anger.     I  never  heard  him  speak  so  gently  before." 

"  So  much  the  better,"  said  Clawbonny.  "  Believe  me, 
Johnson,  that  man  can  save  us  yet." 

And  drawing  his  hood  as  closely  round  his  head  as  pos- 
sible, the  Doctor  seized  his  iron-tipped  staff,  and  set  out 
without  further  delay. 

Johnson  and  Bell  commenced  operations  immediately. 
They  had  simply  to  dig  a  hole  in  the  heart  of  a  great  block 
of  ice;  but  it  was  not  easy  work,  owing  to  the  extreme 
hardness  of  the  material.  However,  this  very  hardness 
guaranteed  the  solidity  of  the  dwelling,  and  the  further 
their  labors  advanced  the  more  they  became  sheltered. 

Hatteras  alternately  paced  up  and  down  and  stood  mo- 
tionless, evidently  shrinking  from  any  approach  to  the 
scene  of  explosion. 

In  about  an  hour  the  Doctor  returned,  bringing  with  him 
Altamont  lying  on  the  sledge,  wrapped  up  in  the  folds  of 
the  tent.  The  poor  dogs  were  so  exhausted  from  starva- 
tion that  they  could  scarcely  draw  it  along,  and  they  had 
begun  to  gnaw  their  harness.  It  was,  indeed,  high  time 
for  beasts  and  men  to  take  food  and  rest. 

While  the  hut  was  being  still  further  dug  out,  the  Doctor 
went  foraging  about,  and  had  the  good  fortune  to  find  a 
little  stove,  almost  undamaged  by  the  explosion.  He  soon 
restored  it  to  working  trim,  and,  by  the  time  the  hut  was 
completed,  had  filled  it  with  wood  and  got  it  lighted.  Be- 
fore long  it  was  roaring,  and  diffusing  a  genial  warmth  on 
all  sides.     The  American  was  brought  in  and  laid  on  blan- 


THE   DOCTOR'S    INVENTORY  7 

kets,  and  the  four  Englishmen  seated  themselves  round  the 
fire  to  enjoy  their  scanty  meal  of  biscuit  and  hot  tea,  the 
last  remains  of  the  provisions  on  the  sledge.  Not  a  word 
was  spoken  by  Hatteras,  and  the  others  respected  his  si- 
lence. 

When  the  meal  was  over,  the  Doctor  rose  and  went  out, 
making  a  sign  to  Johnson  to  follow. 

"  Come,  Johnson,"  he  said,  "  we  will  take  an  inventory 
of  all  we  have  left.  We  must  know  exactly  how  we  are 
off,  and  our  treasures  are  scattered  in  all  directions;  so 
we  had  better  begin,  and  pick  them  up  as  fast  as  possible, 
for  the  snow  may  fall  at  any  moment,  and  then  it  would  be 
quite  useless  to  look  for  anything." 

"Don't  let  us  lose  a  minute,  then,"  replied  Johnson. 
"  Fire  and  food — these  are  our  chief  wants." 

"  Very  well,  you  search  one  side  and  I'll  take  the  other, 
and  we'll  take  from  the  center  to  the  circumference." 

This  task  occupied  two  hours,  and  all  they  discovered 
was  a  little  salt  meat,  about  50  lbs.  of  pemmican,  three 
sacks  of  biscuits,  a  small  stock  of  chocolate,  five  or  six 
pints  of  brandy,  and  about  two  lbs.  of  coffee,  picked  up 
bean  by  bean  off  the  ice. 

Neither  blankets,  nor  hammocks,  nor  clothing — all  had 
been  consumed  in  the  devouring  flame. 

This  slender  store  of  provisions  would  hardly  last  three 
weeks,  and  they  had  wood  enough  to  supply  the  stove  for 
about  the  same  time. 

Now  that  the  inventory  was  made,  the  next  business 
was  to  fetch  the  sledge.  The  tired-out  dogs  were  har- 
nessed sorely  against  their  will,  and  before  long  returned, 
bringing  the  few  but  precious  treasures  found  among  the 
debris  of  the  brig.  These  were  safely  deposited  in  the  hut, 
and  then  Johnson  and  Clawbonny,  half- frozen  with  their 
work,  resumed  their  places  beside  their  companions  in  mis- 
fortune. 

CHAPTER   II 

FIRST  WORDS  OF  ALTAMONT 

About  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  gray  snow  clouds 
cleared  away  for  a  little  and  the  stars  shone  out  brilliantly 
in  the  sky. 


8  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

Hatteras  seized  the  opportunity  and  went  out  silently 
to  take  the  altitude  of  some  of  the  principal  constellations. 
He  wished  to  ascertain  if  the  ice-field  was  still  drifting. 

In  half  an  hour  he  returned  and  sat  down  in  a  corner 
of  the  hut,  where  he  remained  without  stirring  all  night, 
motionless  as  if  asleep,  but  in  reality  buried  in  deepest 
thought. 

The  next  day  the  snow  fell  heavily,  and  the  Doctor  con- 
gratulated himself  on  his  wise  forethought,  when  he  saw 
the  white  sheet  lying  three  feet  thick  over  the  scene  of  the 
explosion,  completely  obliterating  all  traces  of  the  Forward. 

It  was  impossible  to  venture  outside  in  such  weather, 
but  the  stove  drew  capitally,  and  made  the  hut  quite  com- 
fortable, or,  at  any  rate,  it  seemed  so  to  the  weary,  worn- 
out  adventurers. 

The  American  was  in  less  pain,  and  was  evidently  grad- 
ually coming  back  to  life.  He  opened  his  eyes,  but  could 
not  yet  speak,  for  his  lips  were  so  affected  by  the  scurvy 
that  articulation  was  impossible,  but  he  could  hear  and  un- 
derstand all  that  was  said  to  him.  On  learning  what  had 
passed,  and  the  circumstances  of  his  discovery,  he  ex- 
pressed his  thanks  by  gestures,  and  the  Doctor  was  too  wise 
to  let  him  know  how  brief  his  respite  from  death  would 
prove.  In  three  weeks  at  most  every  vestige  of  food  would 
be  gone. 

About  noon  Hatteras  roused  himself,  and  going  up  to 
his  friends,  said: 

"  We  must  make  up  our  minds  what  to  do,  but  I  must 
request  Johnson  to  tell  me  first  all  the  particulars  of  the 
mutiny  on  the  brig,  and  how  this  final  act  of  baseness  came 
about." 

"What  good  will  that  do?"  said  the  Doctor.  "The 
fact  is  certain,  and  it  is  no  use  thinking  over  it." 

"  I  differ  from  your  opinion,"  rejoined  Hatteras. 
"Let  me  hear  the  whole  affair  from  Johnson,  and  then  I 
will  banish  it  from  my  thoughts." 

"  Well,"  said  the  boatswain,  "  this  was  how  it  happened. 
I  did  all  in  my  power  to  prevent,  but -" 

"  I  am  sure  of  that,  Johnson ;  and  what's  more,  I  have 
no  doubt  the  ringleaders  had  been  hatching  their  plans  for 
some  time." 

"  That's  my  belief,  too,"  said  the  Doctor. 


FIRST    WORDS    OF  ALTAMONT  9 

"  And  so  it  is  mine,"  resumed  Johnson;  "  for  almost  im- 
mediately after  your  departure  Shandon,  supported  by  the 
others,  took  the  command  of  the  ship.  I  could  not  resist 
him,  and  from  that  moment  everybody  did  pretty  much  as 
they  pleased.  Shandon  made  no  attempt  to  restrain  them : 
it  was  his  policy  to  make  them  believe  that  their  privations 
and  toils  were  at  an  end.  Economy  was  entirely  disre- 
garded. A  blazing  fire  was  kept  up  in  the  stove,  and  the 
men  were  allowed  to  eat  and  drink  at  discretion;  not  only 
tea  and  coffee  was  at  their  disposal,  but  all  the  spirits  on 
board,  and  on  men  who  had  been  so  long  deprived  of  ardent 
liquors,  you  may  guess  the  result.  They  went  on  in  this 
manner  from  the  7th  to  the  15th  of  January.'" 

"And  this  was  Shandon' s  doing?"  asked  Hatteras. 

"  Yes,  captain." 

"Never  mention  his  name  to  me  again!  Go  on,  John- 
son." 

"  It  was  about  the  24th  or  25th  of  January  that  they 
resolved  to  abandon  the  ship.  Their  plan  was  to  reach  the 
west  coast  of  Baffin's  Bay,  and  from  thence  to  embark  in 
the  boat  and  follow  the  track  of  the  whalers,  or  to  get  to 
some  of  the  Greenland  settlements  on  the  eastern  side. 
Provisions  were  abundant,  and  the  sick  men  were  so  ex- 
cited by  the  hope  of  return  that  they  were  almost  well. 
They  began  their  preparations  for  departure  by  making  a 
sledge  which  they  were  to  draw  themselves,  as  they  had  no 
dogs.  This  was  not  ready  till  the  15th  of  February,  and 
I  was  always  hoping  for  your  arrival,  though  I  half 
dreaded  it  too,  for  you  could  have  done  nothing  with  the 
men,  and  they  would  have  massacred  you  rather  than  re- 
main on  board.  I  tried  my  influence  on  each  one  sepa- 
rately, remonstrating  and  reasoning  with  them,  and  point- 
ing out  the  dangers  they  would  encounter,  and  also  the 
cowardice  of  leaving  you,  but  it  was  a  mere  waste  of 
words,  not  even  the  best  among  them  would  listen  to  me. 
Shandon  was  impatient  to  be  off,  and  fixed  the  22nd  of 
February  for  starting.  The  sledge  and  the  boat  were 
packed  as  closely  as  possible  with  provisions  and  spirits, 
and  heaps  of  wood,  to  obtain  which  they  had  hewed  the 
brig  down  to  her  water-line.  The  last  day  the  men  ran 
riot.  They  completely  sacked  the  ship,  and  in  a  drunken 
paroxysm  Pen  and  two  or  three  others  set  it  on  fire.     I 


io  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

fought  and  struggled  against  them,  but  they  threw  me 
down  and  assailed  me  with  blows,  and  then  the  wretches, 
headed  by  Shandon,  went  off  towards  the  east,  and  were 
soon  out  of  sight.  I  found  myself  alone  on  the  burning 
ship,  and  what  could  I  do?  The  fire-hole  was  completely 
blocked  up  with  ice.  I  had  not  a  single  drop  of  water! 
For  two  days  the  Forward  struggled  with  the  flames,  and 
you  know  the  rest." 

A  long  silence  followed  the  gloomy  recital,  broken  at 
length  by  Hatteras,  who  said : 

"Johnson,  I  thank  you;  you  did  all  you  could  to  save 
my  ship,  but  single-handed  you  could  not  resist.  Again 
I  thank  you,  and  now  let  the  subject  be  dropped.  Let  us 
unite  efforts  for  our  common  salvation.  There  are  four 
of  us,  four  companions,  four  friends,  and  all  our  lives  are 
equally  precious.  Let  each  give  his  opinion  on  the  best 
course  for  us  to  pursue." 

"  You  ask  us  then,  Hatteras,"  said  the  Doctor ;  "  we  are 
all  devoted  to  you,  and  our  words  come  from  our  hearts. 
But  will  you  not  state  your  own  views  first  ?  " 

"That  would  be  little  use,"  said  Hatteras,  sadly;  "my 
opinion  might  appear  interested;  let  me  hear  all  yours 
first." 

"  Captain,"  said  Johnson,  "  before  pronouncing  on  such 
an  important  matter,  I  wish  to  ask  you  a  question." 

"  Ask  it,  then,  Johnson." 

"You  went  out  yesterday  to  ascertain  our  exact  posi- 
tion ;  well,  is  the  field  drifting  or  stationary  ?  " 

"  Perfectly  stationary.  It  had  not  moved  since  the  last 
reckoning  was  made.  I  find  we  are  just  where  we  were 
before  we  left,  in  8o°  15"  lat.  and  1270  35"  long." 

"And  what  distance  are  we  from  the  nearest  sea  to  the 
east?" 

"  About  six  hundred  miles." 

"  And  that  sea  is " 

"  Smith's  Sound,"  was  the  reply. 

"The  same  that  we  could  not  get  through  last  April?" 

"  The  same." 

"  Well,  captain,  now  we  know  our  actual  situation,  we 
are  in  a  better  position  to  determine  our  course  of  action." 

"  Speak  your  minds,  then,"  said  Hatteras,  again  burying 
his  head  in  his  hands. 


FIRST    WORDS    OF  ALTAMONT  n 

"  What  do  you  say,  Bell  ?  "  asked  the  Doctor. 

"  It  strikes  me  the  case  doesn't  need  long  thinking  over," 
said  the  carpenter.  "  We  must  get  back  at  once  without 
losing  a  single  day  or  even  a  single  hour,  either  to  the 
south  or  east,  and  make  our  way  to  the  nearest  coast,  even 
if  we  are  two  months  doing  it !  " 

"  We  have  only  food  for  three  weeks,"  replied  Hatteras, 
without  raising  his  head. 

"  Very  well,"  said  Johnson,  "  we  must  make  the  journey 
in  three  weeks,  since  it  is  our  last  chance.  Even  if  we  can 
only  crawl  on  our  knees  before  we  get  to  our  destination, 
we  must  be  there  in  twenty-five  days." 

"  This  part  of  the  Arctic  continent  is  unexplored.  We 
may  have  to  encounter  difficulties.  Mountains  and  gla- 
ciers may  bar  our  progress,"  objected  Hatteras. 

"  I  don't  see  that's  any  sufficient  reason  for  not  attempt- 
ing it.  We  shall  have  to  endure  sufferings,  no  doubt, 
and  perhaps  many.  We  shall  have  to  limit  ourselves  to 
the  barest  quantities  of  food,  unless  our  guns  should  pro- 
cure us  anything." 

"  There  is  only  about  half  a  pound  of  powder  left,"  said 
Hatteras. 

"  Come  now,  Hatteras,  I  know  the  full  weight  of  your 
objections,  and  I  am  not  deluding  myself  with  vain  hopes. 
But  I  think  I  can  read  your  motive.  Have  you  any  prac- 
tical suggestion  to  offer?  " 

"  No,"  said  Hatteras,  after  a  little  hesitation. 

"  You  don't  doubt  our  courage,"  continued  the  doctor. 
"  We  would  follow  you  to  the  last — you  know  that.  But 
must  we  not,  meantime,  give  up  all  hope  of  reaching  the 
Pole?  Your  plans  have  been  defeated  by  treachery. 
Natural  difficulties  you  might  have  overcome,  but  you 
have  been  outmatched  by  perfidy  and  human  weakness. 
You  have  done  all  that  man  could  do,  and  you  would  have 
succeeded,  I  am  certain;  but  situated  as  we  are  now,  are 
you  not  obliged  to  relinquish  your  projects  for  the  pres- 
ent, and  is  not  a  return  to  England  even  positively  neces- 
sary before  you  could  continue  them?" 

"  Well,  captain  ?  "  asked  Johnson,  after  waiting  a  con- 
siderable time  for  Hatteras  to  reply. 

Thus  interrogated,  he  raised  his  head,  and  said  in  a  con- 
strained tone : 


12  THE    DESERT    OF    ICE 

"You  think  yourselves  quite  certain  then  of  reaching 
the  Sound,  exhausted  though  you  are,  and  almost  without 
food?" 

"  No,"  replied  the  Doctor,  "  but  there  is  one  thing  cer- 
tain, the  Sound  won't  come  to  us,  we  must  go  to  it.  We 
may  chance  to  find  some  Esquimaux  tribes  farther  south." 

"  Besides,  isn't  there  the  chance  of  falling  in  with  some 
ship  that  is  wintering  here  ?  "  asked  Johnson. 

"Even  supposing  the  Sound  is  blocked  up,  couldn't  we 
get  across  to  some  Greenland  or  Danish  settlement?  At 
any  rate,  Hatteras,  we  can  get  nothing  by  remaining  here. 
The  route  to  England  is  towards  the  south,  not  the  north." 

"  Yes,"  said  Bell,  "  Mr.  Clawbonny  is  right.  We  must 
start,  and  start  at  once.  We  have  been  forgetting  our 
country  too  long  already." 

"Is  this  your  advice,  Johnson?"  asked  Hatteras  again. 

"  Yes,  captain." 

"And  yours,  Doctor?" 

"  Yes,  Hatteras." 

Hatteras  remained  silent,  but  his  face,  in  spite  of  him- 
self, betrayed  his  inward  agitation.  The  issue  of  his 
whole  life  hung  on  the  decision  he  had  to  make,  for  he 
felt  that  to  return  to  England  was  to  lose  all!  He  could 
not  venture  on  a  fourth  expedition. 

The  Doctor,  finding  he  did  not  reply,  added : 

"  I  ought  also  to  have  said,  that  there  is  not  a  moment 
to  lose.  The  sledge  must  be  loaded  with  the  provisions 
at  once,  and  as  much  wood  as  possible.  I  must  confess 
six  hundred  miles  is  a  long  journey,  but  we  can,  or  rather 
we  must,  make  twenty  miles  a  day,  which  will  bring  us  to 
the  coast  about  the  26th  of  March." 

"But  cannot  we  wait  a  few  days  yet?"  said  Hatteras. 

"  What  are  you  hoping  for  ?  "  asked  Johnson. 

"  I  don't  know.  Who  can  tell  the  future?  It  is  neces- 
sary, too,  that  you  should  get  your  strength  a  little  re- 
cruited. You  might  sink  down  on  the  road  with  fatigue, 
without  even  a  snow-hut  to  shelter  you." 

"  But  think  of  the  terrible  death  that  awaits  us  here," 
replied  the  carpenter. 

"My  friends,"  said  Hatteras,  in  almost  supplicating 
tones;  "you  are  despairing  too  soon.  I  should  propose 
that  we  should  seek  our  deliverance  towards  the  north,  but 


FIRST    WORDS    OF  ALTAMONT  13 

you  would  refuse  to  follow  me,  and  yet  why  should  there 
not  be  Esquimaux  tribes  round  about  the  Pole  as  well  as 
towards  the  south?  The  open  sea,  of  the  existence  of 
which  we  are  certified,  must  wash  the  shores  of  continents. 
Nature  is  logical  in  all  her  doings.  Consequently  vegeta- 
tion must  be  found  there  when  the  earth  is  no  longer  ice- 
bound. Is  there  not  a  promised  land  awaiting  us  in  the 
north  from  which  you  would  flee?  " 

Hatteras  became  animated  as  he  spoke,  and  Doctor 
Clawbonny's  excitable  nature  was  so  wrought  upon  that 
his  decision  began  to  waver.  He  was  on  the  point  of  yield- 
ing, when  Johnson,  with  his  wiser  head  and  calmer  tem- 
perament, recalled  him  to  reason  and  duty  by  calling  out : 

"  Come,  Bell,  let  us  be  off  to  the  sledge." 

"All  right,"  said  Bell,  and  the  two  had  risen  to  leave 
the  hut,  when  Hatteras  exclaimed: 

"Oh,  Johnson!  You!  you!  Well,  go!  I  shall  stay, 
I  shall  stay!" 

"  Captain ! "  said  Johnson,  stopping  in  spite  of  himself. 

"  I  shall  stay,  I  tell  you.  Go !  Leave  me  like  the  rest ! 
Come,  Duk,  you  and  I  will  stay  together." 

The  faithful  dog  barked  as  if  he  understood,  and  set- 
tled himself  down  beside  his  master.  Johnson  looked  at 
the  Doctor,  who  seemed  at  a  loss  to  know  what  to  do,  but 
came  to  the  conclusion  at  last  that  the  best  way,  meantime, 
was  to  calm  Hatteras,  even  at  the  sacrifice  of  a  day.  He 
was  just  about  to  try  the  force  of  his  eloquence  in  this  di- 
rection, when  he  felt  a  light  touch  on  his  arm,  and  turning 
round  saw  Altamont,  who  had  crawled  out  of  bed  and  man- 
aged to  get  on  his  knees.  He  was  trying  to  speak,  but  his 
swollen  lips  could  scarcely  make  a  sound.  Hatteras  went 
towards  him,  and  watched  his  efforts  to  articulate  so  at- 
tentively that  in  a  few  minutes  he  made  out  a  word  that 
sounded  like  Porpoise,  and  stooping  over  him  he  asked: 

"  Is  it  the  P  or  poise  f  " 

Altamont  made  a  sign  in  the  affirmative,  and  Hatteras 
went  on  with  his  queries,  now  that  he  had  found  a  clue. 

"  In  these  seas  ?  " 

The  affirmative  gesture  was  repeated. 

"Is  she  in  the  north?" 

"Yes." 

"Do  you  know  her  position? " 


14  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

"Yes." 

"Exactly?" 

"Yes."  < 

For  a  minute  or  so  nothing  more  was  said,  and  the  on- 
lookers waited  with  palpitating  hearts. 

Then  Hatteras  spoke  again  and  said: 

"Listen  to  me.  We  must  know  the  exact  position  of 
your  vessel.  I  will  count  the  degrees  aloud,  and  you  will 
stop  me  when  I  come  to  the  right  one." 

The  American  assented  by  a  motion  of  the  head,  and 
Hatteras  began: 

"We'll  take  the  longitude  first.  1050,  No?  1060, 
1070  ?     It  is  to  the  west,  I  suppose?  " 

"  Yes,"  replied  Altamont. 

"Let  us  go  on,  then:  1090,  no°,  1120,  1140,  116°, 
1180,  1200." 

"  Yes,"  interrupted  the  sick  man. 

"  1200  of  longitude,  and  how  many  minutes?  I  will 
count." 

Hatteras  began  at  number  one,  and  when  he  got  to  fif- 
teen, Altamont  made  a  sign  to  stop. 

"Very  good,"  said  Hatteras;  "now  for  the  latitude. 
Are  you  listening?     8o°,  81  °,  820,  830." 

Again  the  sign  to  stop  was  made. 

"Now  for  the  minutes:  5',  10',  15',  20',  25',  30',  35'." 

Altamont  stopped  him  once  more,  and  smiled  feebly. 

"You  say,  then,  that  the  Porpoise  is  in  longitude  1200 
15',  and  latitude  83  °  35'?" 

"Yes,"  sighed  the  American,  and  fell  back  motionless 
in  the  Doctor's  arms,  completely  overpowered  by  the  effort 
he  had  made. 

"  Friends !  "  exclaimed  Hatteras ;  "  you  see  I  was  right. 
Our  salvation  lies  indeed  in  the  north,  always  in  the  north. 
We  shall  be  saved !  " 

But  the  joyous,  exulting  words  had  hardly  escaped  his 
lips  before  a  sudden  thought  made  his  countenance  change. 
The  serpent  of  jealousy  had  stung  him,  for  this  stranger 
was  an  American,  and  he  had  reached  three  degrees  nearer 
the  Pole  than  the  ill-fated  Forward. 


CHAPTER   III 

A  SEVENTEEN  DAY'S  MARCH 

These  first  words  of  Altamont  had  completely  changed 
the  whole  aspect  of  affairs,  but  his  communication  was 
still  incomplete,  and,  after  giving  him  a  little  time  to  rest, 
the  doctor  undertook  the  task  of  conversing  again  with 
him,  putting  his  questions  in  such  a  form  that  a  move- 
ment of  the  head  or  eyes  would  be  a  sufficient  answer. 

He  soon  ascertained  that  the  Porpoise  was  a  three-mast 
American  ship,  from  New  York,  wrecked  on  the  ice,  with 
provisions  and  combustibles  in  abundance  still  on  board, 
and  that,  though  she  had  been  thrown  on  her  side,  she 
had  not  gone  to  pieces,  and  there  was  every  chance  of 
saving  her  cargo. 

Altamont  and  his  crew  had  left  her  two  months  pre- 
viously, taking  the  long  boat  with  them  on  a  sledge.  They 
intended  to  get  to  Smith's  Sound  and  reach  some  whaler 
that  would  take  them  back  to  America;  but  one  after  an- 
other succumbed  to  fatigue  and  illness,  till  at  last  Altamont 
and  two  men  were  all  that  remained  out  of  thirty;  and 
truly  he  had  survived  by  a  providential  miracle,  while  his 
two  companions  already  lay  beside  him  in  the  sleep  of 
death. 

Hatteras  wished  to  know  why  the  Porpoise  had  come  so 
far  north,  and  learned  in  reply  that  she  had  been  irresistibly 
driven  there  by  the  ice.  But  his  anxious  fears  were  not 
satisfied  with  this  explanation,  and  he  asked  further  what 
was  the  purpose  of  his  voyage.  Altamont  said  he  wanted 
to  make  the  northwest  passage,  and  this  appeared  to  con- 
tent the  jealous  Englishman,  for  he  made  no  more  reference 
to  the  subject. 

"  Well,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  it  strikes  me  that,  instead  of 
trying  to  get  to  Baffin's  Bay,  our  best  plan  would  be  to  go 
in  search  of  the  Porpoise,  for  here  lies  a  ship  a  full  third 
of  the  distance  nearer,  and,  more  than  that,  stocked  with 
everything  necessary  for  winter  quarters." 

"I  see  no  other  course  open  to  us,"  replied  Bell. 

"  And  the  sooner  we  go  the  better,"  added  Johnson,  "  for 
the  time  we  allow  ourselves  must  depend  on  our  pro- 
visions." 

"You  are  right,  Johnson,"  returned  the  doctor.  "If 
we  start  to-morrow,  we  must  reach  the  Porpoise  by  the  15th 

15 


16  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

of  March,  unless  we  mean  to  die  of  starvation.  What  do 
you  say,  Hatteras  ?  " 

"  Let  us  make  preparations  immediately,  but  perhaps 
the  route  may  be  longer  than  we  suppose." 

"  How  can  that  be,  captain  ?  The  man  seems  quite  sure 
of  the  position  of  his  ship,"  said  the  Doctor. 

"But  suppose  the  ice-field  should  have  drifted  like 
ours  ?  " 

Here  Altamont,  who  was  listening  attentively,  made  a 
sign  that  he  wished  to  speak,  and  after  much  difficulty 
he  succeeded  in  telling  the  doctor  that  the  Porpoise  had 
struck  on  rocks  near  the  coast,  and  that  it  was  impossible 
for  her  to  move. 

This  was  reassuring  information,  though  it  cut  off  all 
hope  of  returning  to  Europe,  unless  Bell  could  construct 
a  smaller  ship  out  of  the  wreck. 

No  time  was  lost  in  getting  ready  to  start.  The  sledge 
was  the  principal  thing,  as  it  needed  thorough  repair. 
There  was  plenty  of  wood,  and,  profiting  by  the  experience 
they  had  recently  had  of  this  mode  of  transit,  several  im- 
provements were  made  by  Bell. 

Inside,  a  sort  of  a  couch  was  laid  for  the  American,  and 
covered  over  with  the  tent.  The  small  stock  of  provisions 
did  not  add  much  to  the  weight,  but,  to  make  up  the  de- 
ficiency, as  much  wood  was  piled  upon  it  as  it  could 
hold. 

The  Doctor  did  the  packing,  and  made  an  exact  calcula- 
tion of  how  long  their  stores  would  last.  He  found  that, 
by  allowing  three-quarters  rations  to  each  man  and  full 
rations  to  the  dogs,  they  might  hold  out  for  three  weeks. 

Towards  seven  in  the  evening  they  felt  so  worn  out 
that  they  were  obliged  to  give  up  work  for  the  night  but, 
before  lying  down  to  sleep,  they  heaped  up  the  wood  in 
the  stove,  and  made  a  roaring  fire,  determined  to  allow 
themselves  this  parting  luxury.  As  they  gathered  round 
it,  basking  in  the  unaccustomed  heat,  and  enjoying  their 
hot  coffee  and  biscuits  and  pemmican,  they  became  quite 
cheerful,  and  forgot  all  their  sufferings. 

About  seven  in  the  morning  they  set  to  work  again,  and 
by  three  in  the  afternoon  everything  was  ready. 

It  was  almost  dark,  for,  though  the  sun  had  reappeared 
above  the  horizon  since  the  31st  of  January,  his  light  was 

V.  Ill  Verne 


A   SEVENTEEN    DAYS'    MARCH  17 

feeble  and  of  short  duration.  Happily  the  moon  would 
rise  about  half-past  six,  and  her  soft  beams  would  give 
sufficient  light  to  show  the  road. 

The  parting  moment  came.  Altamont  was  overjoyed 
at  the  idea  of  starting,  though  the  jolting  would  necessarily 
increase  his  sufferings,  for  the  Doctor  would  find  on  board 
the  medicines  he  required  for  his  cure. 

They  lifted  him  onto  the  sledge,  and  laid  him  as  com- 
fortably as  possible,  and  then  harnessed  the  dogs,  including 
Duk.  One  final  look  towards  the  icy  bed  where  the  For- 
ward had  been,  and  the  little  party  set  out  for  the  Porpoise. 
Bell  was  scout  as  before;  the  Doctor  and  Johnson  took 
each  a  side  of  the  sledge,  and  lent  a  helping  hand  when 
necessary;  while  Hatteras  walked  behind  to  keep  all  in 
the  right  track. 

They  got  on  pretty  quickly,  for  the  weather  was  good, 
and  the  ice  smooth  and  hard,  allowing  the  sledge  to  glide 
easily  along;  yet  the  temperature  was  so  low  that  men  and 
dogs  were  soon  panting,  and  had  often  to  stop  and  take 
breath.  About  seven  the  moon  shone  out,  and  irradiated 
the  whole  horizon.  Far  as  the  eye  could  see,  there  was 
nothing  visible  but  a  wide-stretching  level  plain  of  ice, 
without  a  solitary  hummock  or  patch  to  relieve  the  uni- 
formity. 

As  the  doctor  remarked  to  his  companions,  it  looked  like 
some  vast,  monotonous  desert. 

"  Ay !  Mr.  Clawbonny,  it  is  a  desert,  but  we  shan't  die 
of  thirst  in  it  at  any  rate." 

"  That's  a  comfort,  certainly;  but  I'll  tell  you  one  thing; 
it  proves,  Johnson,  we  must  be  a  great  distance  from  any 
coast.  The  nearer  the  coast  the  more  numerous  the  ice- 
bergs in  general,  and  you  see  there  is  not  one  in  sight." 

"  The  horizon  is  rather  misty,  though." 

"  So  it  is,  but  ever  since  we  started  we  have  been  on  this 
same  interminable  ice-field." 

"  Do  you  know,  Mr.  Clawbonny,  that  smooth  as  this  ice 
is,  we  are  going  over  most  dangerous  ground?  Fathom- 
less abysses  lie  beneath  our  feet." 

"  That's  true  enough,  but  they  won't  engulf  us.  This 
white  sheet  over  them  is  pretty  tough,  I  can  tell  you.  It 
is  always  getting  thicker,  too;  for  in  these  latitudes  it 
snows  nine  days  out  of  ten,  even  in  April  and  May;  ay,  and 


18  THE   DESERT    OF   ICE 

in  June  as  well.  The  ice  here,  in  some  parts,  cannot  be 
less  than  between  thirty  and  forty  feet  thick." 

"  That  sounds  reassuring,  at  all  events,"  said  Johnson. 

"  Yes,  we're  not  like  the  skaters  on  the  Serpentine — al- 
ways in  danger  of  falling  through.  This  ice  is  strong 
enough  to  bear  the  weight  of  the  Custom  House  in  Liver- 
pool, or  the  Houses  of  Parliament  in  Westminster." 

"  Can  they  reckon  pretty  nearly  what  ice  will  bear,  Mr. 
Clawbonny?"  asked  the  old  sailor,  always  eager  for  in- 
formation. 

"What  can't  be  reckoned  nowadays ?  Yes,  ice  two 
inches  thick  will  bear  a  man;  three  and  a  half  inches,  a 
man  on  horseback;  five  inches,  an  eight-pounder;  eight 
inches,  field  artillery;  and  ten  inches,  a  whole  army." 

"  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  such  a  power  of  resistance, 
but  you  were  speaking  of  the  incessant  snow  just  now,  and 
I  cannot  help  wondering  where  it  comes  from,  for  the  wa- 
ter all  round  is  frozen,  and  what  makes  the  clouds?" 

"That's  a  natural  enough  question,  but  my  notion  is 
that  nearly  all  the  snow  or  rain  that  we  get  here  comes 
from  the  temperate  zones.  I  fancy  each  of  those  snow- 
flakes  was  originally  a  drop  of  water  in  some  river,  caught 
up  by  evaporation  into  the  air,  and  wafted  over  here  in  the 
shape  of  clouds;  so  that  it  is  not  impossible  that  when  we 
quench  our  thirst  with  the  melted  snow,  we  are  actually 
drinking  from  the  very  rivers  of  our  own  native  land." 

Just  at  this  moment  the  conversation  was  interrupted  by 
Hatteras,  who  called  out  that  they  were  getting  out  of  the 
straight  line.  The  increasing  mist  made  it  difficult  to  keep 
together,  and  at  last,  about  eight  o'clock,  they  determined 
to  come  to  a  halt,  as  they  had  gone  fifteen  miles.  The  tent 
was  put  up  and  the  stove  lighted,  and  after  their  usual  sup- 
per they  lay  down  and  slept  comfortably  till  morning. 

The  calm  atmosphere  was  highly  favorable,  for  though 
the  cold  became  intense,  and  the  mercury  was  always 
frozen  in  the  thermometer,  they  found  no  difficulty  in  con- 
tinuing their  route,  confirming  the  truth  of  Parry's_  asser- 
tion that  any  man  suitably  clad  may  walk  abroad  with  im- 
punity in  the  lowest  temperature,  provided  there  is  no 
wind;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  least  breeze  would 
make  the  skin  smart  acutely,  and  bring  on  violent  headache, 
which  would  soon  end  in  death. 


A    SEVENTEEN    DAYS'    MARCH  19 

On  the  5th  of  March  a  peculiar  phenomenon  occurred. 
The  sky  was  perfectly  clear  and  glittering  with  stars,  when 
suddenly  snow  began  to  fall  thick  and  fast,  though  there 
was  not  a  cloud  in  the  heavens;  and  through  the  white 
flakes  the  constellations  could  be  seen  shining.  This  cur- 
ious display  lasted  two  hours,  and  ceased  before  the  Doc- 
tor could  arrive  at  any  satisfactory  conclusion  as  to  its 
cause. 

The  moon  had  ended  her  last  quarter,  and  complete 
darkness  prevailed  now  for  seventeen  hours  out  of  the 
twenty-four.  The  travelers  had  to  fasten  themselves  to- 
gether with  a  long  rope  to  avoid  getting  separated,  and  it 
was  all  but  impossible  to  pursue  the  right  course. 

Moreover,  the  brave  fellows,  in  spite  of  their  iron  will, 
began  to  show  signs  of  fatigue.  Halts  became  more  fre- 
quent, and  yet  every  hour  was  precious,  for  the  provisions 
were  rapidly  coming  to  an  end. 

Hatteras  hardly  knew  what  to  think  as  day  after  day 
went  on  without  apparent  result,  and  he  asked  himself 
sometimes  whether  the  Porpoise  had  any  actual  existence 
except  in  Altamont's  fevered  brain,  and  more  than  once 
the  idea  even  came  into  his  head  that  perhaps  national 
hatred  might  have  induced  the  American  to  drag  them 
along  with  himself  to  certain  death. 

He  told  the  Doctor  his  suppositions,  who  rejected  them 
absolutely,  and  laid  them  down  to  the  score  of  the  unhappy 
rivalry  that  had  arisen  already  between  the  two  captains. 

On  the  14th  of  March,  after  sixteen  days'  march,  the 
little  party  found  themselves  only  yet  in  the  82nd  latitude. 
Their  strength  was  exhausted,  and  they  had  a  hundred 
miles  more  to  go.  To  increase  their  sufferings,  rations 
had  to  be  still  further  reduced.  Each  man  must  be  con- 
tent with  a  fourth  part,  to  allow  the  dogs  their  full  quan- 
tity. 

Unfortunately  they  could  not  rely  at  all  on  their  guns, 
for  only  seven  charges  of  powder  were  left,  and  six  balls. 
They  had  fired  at  several  hares  and  foxes  on  the  road  al- 
ready, but  unsuccessfully. 

However,  on  the  15th  the  Doctor  was  fortunate  enough 
to  surprise  a  seal  basking  on  the  ice,  and,  after  several 
shots,  the  animal  was  captured  and  killed. 

Johnson  soon  had  it  skinned  and  cut  in  pieces,  but  it 


20  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

was  so  lean  that  it  was  worthless  as  food,  unless  its  captors 
would  drink  the  oil  like  the  Esquimaux. 

The  Doctor  was  bold  enough  to  make  the  attempt,  but 
failed  in  spite  of  himself. 

Next  day  several  icebergs  and  hummocks  were  noticed 
on  the  horizon.  Was  this  a  sign  that  land  was  near,  or 
was  it  some  ice-field  that  had  broken  up  ?  It  was  difficult 
to  know  what  to  surmise. 

On  arriving  at  the  first  of  these  hummocks,  the  travelers 
set  to  work  to  make  a  cave  in  it  where  they  could  rest  more 
comfortably  than  in  the  tent,  and  after  three  hours'  perse- 
vering toil,  were  able  to  light  their  stove  and  lie  down  be- 
side it  to  stretch  their  weary  limbs. 


CHAPTER    IV 

THE  LAST   CHARGE  OF  POWDER 

Johnson  was  obliged  to  take  the  dogs  inside  the  hut, 
for  <they  would  have  been  soon  frozen  outside  in  such  dry 
weather.  Had  it  been  snowing  they  would  have  been  safe 
enough,  for  the  snow  served  as  a  covering,  and  kept  in  the 
natural  heat  of  the  animals. 

The  old  sailor,  who  made  a  first-rate  dog-driver,  tried 
his  beasts  with  the  oily  flesh  of  the  seal;  and  found,  to  his 
joyful  surprise,  that  they  ate  it  greedily.  The  Doctor  said 
he  was  not  astonished  at  this,  as  in  North  America  the 
horses  were  chiefly  fed  on  fish;  and  he  thought  that  what 
would  satisfy  an  herbivorous  horse  might  surely  content 
an  omnivorous  dog. 

The  whole  party  were  soon  buried  in  deep  sleep,  for  they 
were  fairly  overcome  with  fatigue.  Johnson  awoke  his 
companions  early  next  morning,  and  the  march  was  re- 
sumed in  haste.  Their  lives  depended  now  on  their  speed, 
for  provisions  would  only  hold  out  three  days  longer. 

The  sky  was  magnificent;  the  atmosphere  extremely 
clear,  and  the  temperature  very  low.  The  sun  rose  in  the 
form  of  a  long  ellipse,  owing  to  refraction,  which  made 
his  horizontal  diameter  appear  twice  the  length  of  his 
vertical. 

The  Doctor,  gun  in  hand,  wandered  away  from  the 
others,  braving  the  solitude  and  the  cold  in  the  hope  of  dis- 


THE   LAST    CHARGE   OF    POWDER         21 

covering  game.  He  had  only  sufficient  powder  left  to 
load  three  times,  and  he  had  just  three  balls.  That  was 
little  enough  should  he  encounter  a  bear,  for  it  often  takes 
ten  or  twelve  shots  to  have  any  effect  on  these  enormous 
animals. 

But  the  brave  doctor  would  have  been  satisfied  with 
humbler  game.  A  few  hares  or  foxes  would  be  a  wel- 
come addition  to  their  scanty  food;  but  all  that  day,  if 
even  he  chanced  to  see  one,  either  he  was  too  far  away,  or 
he  was  deceived  by  refraction,  and  took  a  wrong  aim.  He 
came  back  to  his  companions  at  night  with  crestfallen 
looks,  having  wasted  one  ball  and  one  charge  of  powder. 

Next  day  the  route  appeared  more  difficult,  and  the 
weary  men  could  hardly  drag  themselves  along.  The 
dogs  had  devoured  even  the  entrails  of  the  seal,  and  began 
to  gnaw  their  traces. 

A  few  foxes  passed  in  the  distance,  and  the  doctor  lost 
another  ball  in  attempting  to  shoot  them. 

They  were  forced  to  come  to  a  halt  early  in  the  evening, 
though  the  road  was  illumined  by  a  splendid  Aurora 
Borealis;  for  they  could  not  put  one  foot  before  the 
other. 

Their  last  meal,  on  the  Sunday  evening  was  a  very  sad 
one — if  no  providential  help  came,  their  doom  was  sealed. 

Johnson  set  a  few  traps  before  going  to  sleep,  though 
he  had  no  baits  to  put  inside  them.  He  was  very  disap- 
pointed to  find  them  all  empty  in  the  morning,  and  was  re- 
turning gloomily  to  the  hut  when  he  perceived  a  bear  of 
huge  dimensions.  The  old  sailor  took  it  into  his  head 
that  Heaven  had  sent  this  beast  specially  for  him  to  kill; 
and  without  waking  his  companions,  he  seized  the  doctor's 
gun,  and  was  soon  in  pursuit  of  his  prey. 

On  reaching  the  right  distance  he  took  aim;  but,  just 
as  his  finger  touched  the  trigger,  he  felt  his  arm  tremble. 
His  thick  gloves  hampered  him,  and,  flinging  them  hastily 
off,  he  took  up  the  gun  with  a  firmer  grasp.  But  what  a 
cry  of  agony  escaped  him !  The  skin  of  his  fingers  stuck 
to  the  gun  as  if  it  had  been  red-hot,  and  he  was  forced  to 
let  it  drop.  The  sudden  fall  made  it  go  off,  and  the  last 
ball  was  discharged  in  the  air. 

The  Doctor  ran  out  at  the  noise  of  the  report,  and  un- 
derstood all   at  a   glance.     He   saw  the   animal   walking 


22  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

quietly  off,  and  poor  Johnson  forgetting  his  sufferings  in 
his  despair. 

"  I  am  a  regular  milksop !  "  he  exclaimed,  "  a  cry-baby, 
that  can't  stand  the  least  pain !     And  at  my  age,  too !  " 

"  Come,  Johnson ;  go  in  at  once,  or  you  will  be  frost- 
bitten. Look  at  your  hands — they  are  white  already! 
Come,  come  this  minute." 

"  I  am  not  worth  troubling  about,  Mr.  Clawbonny," 
said  the  old  boatswain.     "  Never  mind,  me ! " 

"  But  you  must  come  in,  you  obstinate  fellow.  Come, 
now,  I  tell  you;  it  will  be  too  late  presently." 

At  last  he  succeeded  in  dragging  the  poor  fellow  into  the 
tent,  where  he  made  him  plunge  his  hands  into  a  bowl  of 
water,  which  the  heat  of  the  stove  kept  in  a  liquid  state, 
though  still  cold.  Johnson's  hands  had  hardly  touched  it 
before  it  froze  immediately." 

"  You  see  it  was  high  time  you  came  in ;  I  should  have 
been  forced  to  amputate  soon,"  said  the  Doctor. 

Thanks  to  his  endeavors,  all  danger  was  over  in  about 
an  hour,  but  he  was  advised  to  keep  his  hands  at  a  good 
distance  from  the  stove  for  some  time  still. 

That  morning  they  had  no  breakfast.  Pemmican  and 
salt  beef  were  both  done.  Not  a  crumb  of  biscuit  re- 
mained. They  were  obliged  to  content  themselves  with 
half  a  cup  of  hot  coffee,  and  start  off  again. 

They  scarcely  went  three  miles  before  they  were  com- 
pelled to  give  up  for  the  day.  They  had  no  supper  but 
coffee,  and  the  dogs  were  so  ravenous  that  they  were  al- 
most devouring  each  other. 

Johnson  fancied  he  could  see  the  bear  following  them  in 
the  distance,  but  he  made  no  remark  to  his  companions. 
Sleep  forsook  the  unfortunate  men,  and  their  eyes  grew 
wild  and  haggard. 

Tuesday  morning  came,  and  it  was  thirty- four  hours 
since  they  had  tasted  a  morsel  of  food.  Yet  these  brave, 
stout-hearted  men  continued  their  march,  sustained  by 
their  superhuman  energy  of  purpose.  They  pushed  the 
sledge  themselves,  for  the  dogs  could  no  longer  draw  it. 

At  the  end  of  two  hours  they  sank  exhausted.  Hatteras 
urged  them  to  make  a  fresh  attempt,  but  his  entreaties  and 
supplications  were  powerless;  they  could  not  do  impossi- 
bilities. 


THE   LAST    CHARGE   OF   POWDER         23 

"  Well,  at  any  rate,"  he  said,  "  I  won't  die  of  cold  if  I 
must  of  hunger."  He  set  to  work  to  hew  out  a  hut  in  an 
iceberg,  aided  by  Johnson,  and  really  they  looked  like  men 
digging  their  own  tomb. 

It  was  hard  labor,  but  at  length  the  task  was  accom- 
plished. The  little  house  was  ready,  and  the  miserable 
men  took  up  their  abode  in  it. 

In  the  evening,  while  the  others  lay  motionless,  a  sort 
of  hallucination  came  over  Johnson,  and  he  began  raving 
about  bears. 

The  Doctor  roused  himself  from  his  torpor,  and  asked 
the  old  man  what  he  meant,  and  what  bear  he  was  talking 
about. 

"  The  bear  that  is  following  us,"  replied  Johnson. 

"  A  bear  following  us  ?  " 

"  Yes,  for  the  last  two  days !  " 

"  For  the  last  two  days !     You  have  seen  him?  " 

"  Yes,  about  a  mile  to  leeward." 

"  And  you  never  told  me,  Johnson !  " 

"  What  was  the  good!" 

"  True  enough,"  said  the  Doctor;  "  we  have  not  a  single 
ball  to  send  after  him ! " 

"  No,  not  even  a  bit  of  iron !  " 

The  Doctor  was  silent  for  a  minute,  as  if  thinking. 
Then  he  said : 

"Are  you  quite  certain  the  animal  is  following  us?" 

"  Yes,  Mr.  Clawbonny,  he  is  reckoning  on  a  good  feed 
of  human  flesh ! " 

"  Johnson !  "  exclaimed  the  Doctor,  grieved  at  the  de- 
spairing mood  of  his  companion. 

"  He  is  sure  enough  of  his  meal !  "  continued  the  poor 
fellow,  whose  brain  began  to  give  way.  "  He  must  be 
hungry,  and  I  don't  see  why  we  should  keep  him  waiting." 

"  Johnson,  calm  yourself !  " 

"  No,  Mr.  Clawbonny,  since  we  must  die,  why  prolong 
the  sufferings  of  the  poor  beast?  He  is  famished  like  our- 
selves. There  are  no  seals  for  him  to  eat,  and  Heaven 
sends  him  men!  So  much  the  better  for  him,  that's 
all!" 

Johnson  was  fast  going  mad.  He  wanted  to  get  up  and 
leave  the  hut,  and  the  Doctor  had  great  difficulty  in  prevent- 
ing  him.     That    he    succeeded    at    all    was    not   through 


24  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

strength,  but  by  saying  in  a  tone  of  the  most  absolute  con- 
viction, "  Johnson,  I  shall  kill  that  bear  to-morrow !  " 

"To-morrow!"  said  Johnson,  as  if  waking  up  from 
some  bad  dream. 

"  Yes,  to-morrow." 

"  You  have  no  ball !  " 

"  I'll  make  one." 

"  You  have  no  lead !  " 

"  No,  but  I  have  mercury." 

So  saying,  he  took  the  thermometer,  which  stood  at  500 
above  zero,  and  went  outside  and  laid  it  on  a  block  of  ice. 
Then  he  came  in  again  and  said,  "  To-morrow !  Go  to 
sleep,  and  wait  till  the  sun  rises." 

With  the  first  streak  of  dawn  next  day  the  Doctor  and 
Johnson  rushed  out  to  look  at  the  thermometer.  All  the 
mercury  had  frozen  into  a  compact  cylindrical  mass.  The 
Doctor  broke  the  tube  and  took  it  out.  Here  was  a  hard 
piece  of  metal  ready  for  use. 

"It  is  wonderful,  Mr.  Clawbonny;  you  ought  to  be  a 
proud  man." 

"  Not  at  all,  my  friend,  I  am  only  gifted  with  a  good 
memory,  and  I  have  read  a  great  deal." 

"  How  did  that  help  you?  " 

"  Why,  I  just  happened  to  recollect  a  fact  related  by 
Captain  Ross  in  his  voyages.  He  states  that  they  pierced  a 
plank  an  inch  thick  with  a  bullet  made  of  mercury.  Oil 
would  even  have  suited  my  purpose,  for,  he  adds,  that  a 
ball  of  frozen  almond  oil  splits  through  a  post  without 
breaking  in  pieces." 

"  It  is  quite  incredible !  " 

"  But  it  is  a  fact,  Johnson.  Well,  come  now,  this  bit  of 
metal  may  save  our  lives.  We'll  leave  it  exposed  to  the  air 
a  little  while,  and  go  and  have  a  look  for  the  bear." 

Just  then  Hatteras  made  his  appearance,  and  the  Doctor 
told  him  his  project,  and  showed  him  the  mercury. 

The  captain  grasped  his  hand  silently,  and  the  three  hun- 
ters went  off  in  quest  of  their  game. 

The  weather  was  very  clear,  and  Hatteras,  who  was 
a  little  ahead  of  the  others,  speedily  discovered  the  bear 
about  three  hundred  yards  distant,  sitting  on  his  hind  quar- 
ters sniffing  the  air. 

"  There  he  is !  "  he  exclaimed. 


THE   LAST    CHARGE   OF   POWDER         25 

"  Hush!  "  cried  the  Doctor. 

But  the  enormous  quadruped,  even  when  he  perceived 
his  antagonists,  never  stirred,  and  displayed  neither  fear  nor 
anger.  It  would  not  be  easy  to  get  near  him,  however,  and 
Hatteras  said : 

"Friends,  this  is  no  idle  sport;  our  very  existence  is  at 
stake ;  we  must  act  prudently." 

"  Yes,"  replied  the  Doctor,  "  for  we  have  but  the  one 
shot  to  depend  upon.  We  must  not  miss,  for  if  once  the 
beast  took  to  his  heels  we  have  lost  all  chance  of  him.  He 
would  outstrip  a  hare  in  fleetness !  " 

"  We  must  go  right  up  to  him,"  said  Johnson ;  "  that 
is  the  only  way.  It  is  risking  one's  life,  of  course ;  but  what 
does  that  matter  ?    Let  me  risk  mine." 

"  No,  I  wish  to  take  the  risk  on  myself,"  said  the  Doctor. 

"  I  am  the  one  to  go,"  said  Hatteras,  quietly. 

"  But,  captain,  is  your  life  not  more  necessary  for  the 
safety  of  all  than  a  stupid  old  man's  like  mine?  " 

"  No,  Johnson,  let  me  go.  I'll  not  risk  myself  unneces- 
sarily.   Besides,  I  may  possibly  need  your  assistance." 

"  Hatteras,"  asked  the  Doctor,  "  do  you  mean  to  walk 
right  up  to  the  bear?  " 

"  If  I  were  certain  of  getting  a  shot  at  him,  I  would 
do  that  if  it  cost  me  my  head;  but  he  might  scamper  off  at 
my  approach.  No,  Bruin  is  a  cunning  fellow,  and  we  must 
try  and  be  a  match  for  him." 

"  What  plan  have  you  got  in  your  head  ?  " 

"To  get  within  ten  paces  of  him  without  letting  him 
suspect  it." 

"  And  how  will  you  manage  that?  " 

"  Well,  my  scheme  is  simple  enough,  though  rather  dan- 
gerous. You  kept  the  skin  of  the  seal  you  killed,  didn't 
you  ?  " 

"  It  is  on  the  ledge." 

"  All  right !  Let  us  get  back  to  the  hut,  and  leave  John- 
son here  to  watch." 

Away  they  went,  while  the  old  boatswain  slipped  be- 
hind a  hummock,  which  completely  hid  him  from  the  bear, 
who  continued  still  in  the  same  place  and  in  the  same  posi- 
tion. 


CHAPTER  V 

THE  SEAL  AND  THE  BEAR 

"You  know,  Doctor,"  said  Hatteras,  as  they  returned 
to  the  hut,  "  the  polar  bears  subsist  almost  entirely  on  seals. 
They'll  lie  in  wait  for  them  beside  the  crevasses  for  whole 
days,  ready  to  strangle  them  the  moment  their  heads  appear 
above  the  surface.  It  is  not  likely,  then,  that  a  bear  will 
be  frightened  of  a  seal." 

"  I  think  I  see  what  you  are  after,  but  it  is  dangerous." 

"  Yes,  but  there  is  more  chance  of  success  than  in  trying 
any  other  plan,  so  I  mean  to  risk  it.  I  am  going  to  dress 
myself  in  the  seal's  skin,  and  creep  along  the  ice.  Come, 
don't  let  us  lose  time.    Load  the  gun  and  give  it  me." 

The  Doctor  could  not  say  anything,  for  he  would  have 
done  the  same  himself,  so  he  followed  Hatteras  silently  to 
the  sledge,  taking  with  him  a  couple  of  hatchets  for  his  own 
and  Johnson's  use. 

Hatteras  soon  made  his  toilette,  and  slipped  into  the  skin, 
which  was  big  enough  to  cover  him  almost  entirely. 

"  Now,  then,  give  me  the  gun,"  he  said,  "  and  you  be  off 
to  Johnson.    I  must  try  and  steal  a  march  on  my  adversary." 

"  Courage,  Hatteras !  "  said  the  Doctor,  handing  him  the 
weapon,  which  he  had  carefully  loaded  meanwhile. 

"  Never  fear !  but  be  sure  you  don't  show  yourselves  till 
I  fire." 

The  Doctor  soon  joined  the  old  boatswain  behind  the 
hummock,  and  told  him  what  they  had  been  doing.  The 
bear  was  still  there,  but  moving  restlessly  about,  as  if  he 
felt  the  approach  of  danger. 

In  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  so  the  seal  made  his  appear- 
ance on  the  ice.  He  had  gone  a  good  way  round,  so  as  to 
come  on  the  bear  by  surprise,  and  every  movement  was  so 
perfect  an  imitation  of  a  seal,  that  even  the  Doctor  would 
have  been  deceived  if  he  had  not  known  it  was  Hatteras. 

"  It  is  capital !  "  said  Johnson,  in  a  low  voice. 

The  bear  had  instantly  caught  sight  of  the  supposed  seal, 
for  he  gathered  himself  up,  preparing  to  make  a  spring 
as  the  animal  came  nearer,  apparently  seeking  to  return  to 
his  native  element,  and  unaware  of  the  enemy's  proximity. 
Bruin  went  to  work  with  extreme  prudence,  though  his  eyes 
glared  with  greedy  desire  to  clutch  the  coveted  prey,  for 
he  had  probably  been  fasting  a  month,  if  not  two.    He  al- 

26 


THE  SEAL  AND  THE  BEAR      27 

lowed  his  victim  to  get  within  ten  paces  of  him,  and  then 
sprang  forward  with  a  tremendous  bound,  but  stopped  short, 
stupefied,  and  frightened,  within  three  steps  of  Hatteras, 
who  started  up  that  moment,  and,  throwing  off  his  disguise, 
knelt  on  one  knee,  and  aimed  straight  at  the  bear's  heart. 
He  fired,  and  the  huge  monster  rolled  back  on  the  ice. 

"  Forward !  Forward !  "  shouted  the  Doctor,  hurrying 
towards  Hatteras,  for  the  bear  had  reared  on  his  hind  legs, 
and  was  striking  the  air  with  one  paw  and  tearing  up  the 
snow  to  staunch  his  wound  with  the  other. 

Hatteras  never  moved,  but  waited,  knife  in  hand.  He 
had  aimed  well,  and  fired  with  a  sure  and  steady  aim.  Be- 
fore either  of  his  companions  came  up  he  had  plunged  his 
knife  in  the  animal's  throat,  and  made  an  end  of  him,  for 
he  fell  down  at  once  to  rise  no  more. 

"  Hurrah !  Bravo !  "  shouted  Johnson  and  the  Doctor,  but 
Hatteras  was  as  cool  and  unexcited  as  possible,  and  stood 
with  folded  arms  gazing  at  his  prostrate  foe. 

"  It  is  my  turn  now,"  said  Johnson. 

"  It  is  a  good  thing  the  bear  is  killed,  but  if  we  leave 
him  out  here  much  longer,  he  will  get  as  hard  as  a  stone, 
and  we  shall  be  able  to  do  nothing  with  him." 

He  began  forthwith  to  strip  the  skin  off,  and  a  fine  busi- 
ness it  was,  for  the  enormous  quadruped  was  almost  as 
large  as  an  ox.  It  measured  nearly  nine  feet  long,  and  four 
round,  and  the  great  tusks  in  his  jaws  were  three  inches 
long. 

On  cutting  the  carcass  open,  Johnson  found  nothing  but 
water  in  the  stomach.  The  beast  had  evidently  had  no 
food  for  a  long  time,  yet  it  was  very  fat,  and  weighed 
fifteen  hundred  pounds.  The  hunters  were  so  famished  that 
they  had  hardly  patience  to  carry  home  the  flesh  to  be 
cooked,  and  it  needed  all  the  Doctor's  persuasion  to  pre- 
vent them  eating  it  raw. 

On  entering  the  hut,  each  man  with  a  load  on  his  back, 
Clawbonny  was  struck  with  the  coldness  that  pervaded  the 
atmosphere.  On  going  up  to  the  stove  he  found  the  fire 
black  out.  The  exciting  business  of  the  morning  had  made 
Johnson  neglect  his  accustomed  duty  of  replenishing  the 
stove. 

The  Doctor  tried  to  blow  the  embers  into  a  flame,  but 
finding  he  could  not  even  get  a  red  spark,  he  went  out  to 


28  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

the  sledge  to  fetch  tinder,  and  get  the  steel  from  Johnson. 

The  old  sailor  put  his  hand  into  his  pocket,  but  was  sur- 
prised to  find  the  steel  missing.  He  felt  in  the  other  pockets, 
but  it  was  not  there.  Then  he  went  into  the  hut  again,  and 
shook  the  blanket  he  had  slept  in  all  night,  but  his  search 
was  still  unsuccessful. 

He  went  back  to  his  companions  and  said : 

"Are  you  sure,  Doctor,  you  haven't  the  steel?  " 

"  Quite,  Johnson." 

"  And  you  haven't  it  either,  captain?  " 

"  Not  I !  "  replied  Hatteras. 

"  It  has  always  been  in  your  keeping,"  said  the  Doctor. 

"  Well,  I  have  not  got  it  now ! "  exclaimed  Johnson, 
turning  pale. 

"  Not  got  the  steel ! "  repeated  the  Doctor,  shuddering 
involuntarily  at  the  bare  idea  of  its  loss,  for  it  was  all  the 
means  they  had  of  procuring  a  fire. 

"  Look  again,  Johnson,"  he  said. 

The  boatswain  hurried  to  the  only  remaining  place  he 
could  think  of,  the  hummock  where  he  had  stood  to  watch 
the  bear.  But  the  missing  treasure  was  nowhere  to  be 
found,  and  the  old  sailor  returned  in  despair. 

Hatteras  looked  at  him,  but  no  word  of  reproach  es- 
caped his  lips.    He  only  said : 

"  This  is  a  serious  business,  Doctor." 

"  It  is  indeed !  "  said  Clawbonny. 

"  We  have  not  even  an  instrument,  some  glass  that  we 
might  take  the  lens  out  of,  and  use  like  a  burning  glass." 

"  No,  and  it  is  a  great  pity,  for  the  sun's  rays  are  quite 
strong  enough  just  now  to  light  our  tinder." 

"  Well,"  said  Hatteras,  "  we  must  just  appease  our  hun- 
ger with  the  raw  meat,  and  set  off  again  as  soon  as  we  can, 
to  try  to  discover  the  ship." 

"  Yes ! "  replied  Clawbonny,  speaking  to  himself,  ab- 
sorbed in  his  own  reflections.  "  Yes,  that  might  do  at  a 
pinch!    Why  not?    We  might  try." 

"  What  are  you  dreaming  about  ?  "  asked  Hatteras. 

"  An  idea  has  just  occurred  to  me." 

"  An  idea  come  into  your  head,  Doctor,"  exclaimed  John- 
son ;  "  then  we  are  saved !  " 

"  Will  it  succeed?  that's  the  question." 

"What's  your  project?"  said  Hatteras. 


THE  SEAL  AND  THE  BEAR      29 

"  We  want  a  lens ;  well,  let  us  make  one." 

"  How?  "  asked  Johnson. 

"  With  a  piece  of  ice." 

"  What  ?    Do  you  think  that  would  do  ?  " 

"  Why  not  ?  All  that  is  needed  is  to  collect  the  sun's  rays 
into  one  common  focus,  and  ice  will  serve  that  purpose  as 
well  as  the  finest  crystal." 

"  Is  it  possible  ?  "  said  Johnson. 

"  Yes,  only  I  should  like  fresh- water  ice,  it  is  harder  and 
more  transparent  than  the  other." 

"  There  it  is  to  your  hand,  if  I  am  not  much  mistaken," 
said  Johnson,  pointing  to  a  hummock  close  by.  "  I  fancy 
that  is  fresh  water,  from  the  dark  look  of  it,  and  the  green 
tinge." 

"  You  are  right.    Bring  your  hatchet,  Johnson." 

A  good-sized  piece  was  soon  cut  off,  about  a  foot  in  diam- 
eter, and  the  Doctor  set  to  work.  He  began  by  chop- 
ping it  into  rough  shape  with  the  hatchet ;  then  he  operated 
upon  it  more  carefully  with  his  knife,  making  as  smooth  a 
surface  as  possible,  and  finished  the  polishing  process  with 
his  fingers,  rubbing  away  until  he  had  obtained  as  trans- 
parent a  lens  as  if  it  had  been  made  of  magnificent  crystal. 

The  sun  was  shining  brilliantly  enough  for  the  Doctor's 
experiment.  The  tinder  was  fetched,  and  held  beneath  the 
lens  so  as  to  catch  the  rays  in  full  power.  In  a  few  seconds 
it  took  fire,  to  Johnson's  rapturous  delight. 

He  danced  about  like  an  idiot,  almost  beside  himself  with 
joy,  and  shouted,  "Hurrah!  hurrah!"  while  Clawbonny 
hurried  back  to  the  hut  and  rekindled  the  fire.  The  stove 
was  soon  roaring,  and  it  was  not  many  minutes  before  the 
savory  odor  of  broiled  bear-steak  roused  Bell  from  his  tor- 
por. 

What  a  feast  this  meal  was  to  the  poor  starving  men 
may  be  imagined.  The  Doctor,  however,  counseled  modera- 
tion in  eating,  and  set  the  example  himself. 

"This  is  a  glad  day  for  us,"  he  said,  "and  we  have 
no  fear  of  wanting  food  all  the  rest  of  our  journey.  Still 
we  must  not  forget  we  have  further  to  go  yet,  and  I  think 
the  sooner  we  start  the  better." 

"  We  cannot  be  far  off  now,"  said  Altamont,who  could 
almost  articulate  perfectly  again ;  "  we  must  be  within  forty- 
eight  hours'  march  of  the  Porpoise." 


30  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

"  I  hope  we'll  find  something  there  to  make  a  fire  with," 
said  the  Doctor,  smiling.  "  My  lens  does  well  enough  at 
present;  but  it  needs  the  sun,  and  there  are  plenty  of  days 
when  he  does  not  make  his  appearance  here,  within  less 
than  seven  degrees  of  the  Pole." 

"  Less  than  seven  degrees !  "  repeated  Altamont,  with  a 
sigh ;  "  yes,  my  ship  went  further  than  any  other  has  ever 
ventured." 

"  It  is  time  we  started,"  said  Hatteras,  abruptly. 

"Yes,"  replied  the  Doctor,  glancing  uneasily  ar  the  two 
captains. 

The  dogs  were  speedily  harnessed  to  the  sledge,  and  the 
march  resumed. 

As  they  went  along,  the  Doctor  tried  to  get  out  of  Alta- 
mont the  real  motive  that  had  brought  him  so  far  north. 
But  the  American  made  only  evasive  replies,  and  Claw- 
bonny  whispered  in  old  Johnson's  ear :  "  Two  men  we've 
got  that  need  looking  after." 

"  You  are  right,"  said  Johnson. 

"Hatteras  never  says  a  word  to  this  American,  and  I 
must  say  the  man  has  not  shown  himself  very  grateful.  I 
am  here,  fortunately." 

"  Mr.  Clawbonny,"  said  Johnson,  "  now  this  Yankee  has 
come  back  to  life  again,  I  must  confess  I  don't  much  like 
the  expression  of  his  face." 

"  I  am  much  mistaken  if  he  does  not  suspect  the  projects 
of  Hatteras." 

"Do  you  think  his  own  were  similar?" 

"  Who  knows !  These  Americans,  Johnson,  are  bold, 
daring  fellows.  It  is  likely  enough  an  American  would  try 
to  do  as  much  as  an  Englishman." 

"  Then  you  think  that  Altamont " 

"  I  think  nothing  about  it,  but  his  ship  is  certainly  on  the 
road  to  the  North  Pole." 

"  But  didn't  Altamont  say  that  he  had  been  caught  among 
the  ice,  and  dragged  there  irresistibly  ?  " 

"  He  said  so,  but  I  fancied  there  was  a  peculiar  smile  on 
his  lips  while  he  spoke." 

"  Hang  it !  It  would  be  a  bad  job,  Mr.  Clawbonny,  if  any 
feeling  of  rivalry  came  between  two  men  of  their  stamp." 

"  Heaven  f orf end !  for  it  might  involve  the  most  serious 
consequences,  Johnson." 


THE  SEAL  AND  THE  BEAR      31 

"  I  hope  Altamont  will  remember  he  owes  his  life  to  us?  " 

"  But  do  we  not  owe  ours  to  him  now  ?  I  grant,  without 
us,  he  would  not  be  alive  at  this  moment ;  but  without  him 
and  his  ship,  what  would  become  of  us?" 

"Well,  Mr.  Clawbonny,  you  are  here  to  keep  things 
straight  anyhow,  and  that  is  a  blessing." 

"  I  hope  I  may  manage  it,  Johnson." 

The  journey  proceeded  without  any  fresh  incident,  but 
on  the  Saturday  morning  the  travelers  found  themselves 
in  a  region  of  quite  an  altered  character.  Instead  of  the 
wide,  smooth  plain  of  ice  that  had  hitherto  stretched  before 
them,  overturned  icebergs  and  broken  hummocks  covered 
the  horizon;  while  the  frequent  blocks  of  fresh-water  ice 
showed  that  some  coast  was  near. 

Next  day,  after  a  hearty  breakfast  off  the  bear's  paws, 
the  little  party  continued  their  route;  but  the  road  became 
toilsome  and  fatiguing.  Altamont  lay  watching  the  horizon 
with  feverish  anxiety — an  anxiety  shared  by  all  his  com- 
panions, for,  according  to  the  last  reckoning  made  by  Hat- 
teras,  they  were  now  exactly  in  latitude  83 °  35"  and  longi- 
tude 1200  15",  and  the  question  of  life  or  death  would  be 
decided  before  the  day  was  over. 

At  last,  about  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  Altamont 
started  up  with  a  shout  that  arrested  the  whole  party,  and 
pointing  to  a  white  mass  that  no  eye  but  his  could  have  dis- 
tinguished from  the  surrounding  icebergs,  exclaimed  in  a 
loud,  ringing  voice,  "  The  Porpoise." 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE  PORPOISE 

It  was  the  24th  of  March,  and  Palm  Sunday,  a  bright, 
joyous  day  in  many  a  town  and  village  of  the  Old  World; 
but  in  this  desolate  region  what  mournful  silence  prevailed! 
No  willow  branches  here  with  their  silvery  blossoms— not 
even  a  single  withered  leaf  to  be  seen— not  a  blade  of  grass! 

Yet  this  was  a  glad  day  to  the  travelers,  for  it  promised 
them  speedy  deliverance  from  the  death  that  had  seemed  so 
inevitable.  They  hastened  onward,  the  dogs  put  forth  re- 
newed energy,  and  Duk  barked  his  loudest,  till,  before  long, 
they  arrived  at  the  ship. 


32  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

The  Porpoise  was  completely  buried  under  the  snow. 
All  her  masts  and  rigging  had  been  destroyed  in  the  ship- 
wreck, and  she  was  lying  on  a  bed  of  rocks  so  entirely  on 
her  side  that  her  hull  was  uppermost.  They  had  to  knock 
away  fifteen  feet  of  ice  before  they  could  even  catch  a 
glimpse  of  her,  and  it  was  not  without  great  difficulty  that 
they  managed  to  get  on  board,  and  made  the  welcome  dis- 
covery that  the  provision  stores  had  not  been  visited  by  any 
four-footed  marauders.  It  was  quite  evident,  however,  that 
the  ship  was  not  habitable. 

"  Never  mind !  "  said  Hatteras,  "  we  must  build  a  snow- 
house,  and  make  ourselves  comfortable  on  land." 

"Yes,  but  we  need  not  hurry  over  it,"  said  the  Doctor; 
"  let  us  do  it  well  while  we're  about  it,  and  for  a  time  we 
can  make  shift  on  board;  for  we  must  build  a  good,  sub- 
stantial house,  that  will  protect  us  from  the  bears  as  well 
as  the  cold.  I'll  undertake  to  be  the  architect,  and  you  shall 
see  what  a  first-rate  job  I'll  make  of  it." 

"I  don't  doubt  your  talents,  Mr.  Clawbonny,"  replied 
Johnson;  "but,  meantime,  let  us  see  about  taking  up  our 
abode  here  and  making  an  inventory  of  the  stores  we  find. 
There  does  not  seem  a  boat  visible  of  any  description^  and 
I  fear  these  timbers  are  in  too  bad  a  condition  to  build  a 
new  ship  out  of  them." 

"  I  don't  know  that,"  returned  Clawbonny,  "  time_  and 
thought  do  wonders;  but  our  first  business  is  to  build  a 
house,  and  not  a  ship ;  one  thing  at  a  time,  I  propose." 

"  Quite  right,  too,"  said  Hatteras,  "  so  we'll  go  ashore." 

They  returned  to  the  sledge,  to  communicate  the  result 
of  their  investigation  to  Bell  and  Altamont ;  and  about  four 
in  the  afternoon  the  five  men  installed  themselves  as  well 
as  they  could  on  the  wreck.  Bell  had  managed  to  make  a 
tolerably  level  floor  with  planks  and  spars;  the  stiffened 
cushions  and  hammocks  were  placed  round  the  stove  to 
thaw,  and  were  soon  fit  for  use.  Altamont,  with  the  Doc- 
tor's assistance,  got  on  board  without  much  trouble,  and  a 
sigh  of  satisfaction  escaped  him,  as  if  he  felt  himself  once 
more  at  home — a  sigh  which  to  Johnson's  ear  boded  no 
good. 

The  rest  of  the  day  was  given  to  repose,  and  they  wound 
up  with  a  good  supper  off  the  remains  of  the  bear,  backed 
by  a  plentiful  supply  of  biscuit  and  hot  tea. 

V.  Ill  Verne 


THE    "PORPOISE"  33 

It  was  late  next  morning  before  Hatteras  and  his  com- 
panions woke,  for  their  minds  were  not  burdened  now  with 
any  solicitudes  about  the  morrow,  and  they  might  sleep  as 
long  as  they  pleased.  The  poor  fellows  felt  like  colonists 
safely  arrived  at  their  destination,  who  had  forgotten  all 
the  sufferings  of  the  voyage,  and  thought  only  of  the  new 
life  that  lay  before  them. 

"  Well,  it  is  something,  at  all  events,"  said  the  Doctor, 
rousing  himself  and  stretching  his  arms,  "  for  a  fellow  not 
to  need  to  ask  where  he  is  going  to  find  his  next  bed  and 
breakfast." 

"  Let  us  see  what  there  is  on  board  before  we  say  much," 
said  Johnson. 

The  Porpoise  had  been  thoroughly  equipped  and  pro- 
visioned for  a  long  voyage,  and  on  making  an  inventory  of 
what  stores  remained,  they  found  6,150  lbs.  of  flour,  fat, 
and  raisins;  2,000  lbs.  of  salt  beef  and  pork;  1,500  lbs.  of 
pemmican;  700  lbs.  of  sugar,  and  the  same  of  chocolate;  a 
chest  and  a  half  of  tea,  weighing  96  lbs.;  500  lbs  of  rice; 
several  barrels  of  preserved  fruits  and  vegetables;  a  quantity 
of  lime-juice,  with  all  sorts  of  medicines,  and  300  gallons 
of  rum  and  brandy.  There  was  also  a  large  supply  of  gun- 
powder, ball,  and  shot,  and  coal  and  wood  in  abund- 
ance. 

Altogether,  there  was  enough  to  last  those  five  men  for 
more  than  two  years,  and  all  fear  of  death  from  starvation 
or  cold  was  at  an  end. 

"  Well,  Hatteras,  we're  sure  of  enough  to  live  on  now," 
said  the  Doctor,  "  and  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  reach- 
ing the  Pole." 

"The  Pole!"  echoed  Hatteras. 

"Yes,  why  not?  Can't  we  push  our  way  overland  in 
the  summer  months  ?  " 

"  We  might  overland ;  but  how  could  we  cross  water  ?  " 

"  Perhaps  we  may  be  able  to  build  a  boat  out  of  some 
of  the  ship's  planks." 

"  Out  of  an  American  ship !  "  exclaimed  the  captain, 
contemptuously. 

Clawbonny  was  prudent  enough  to  make  no  reply,  and 
presently  changed  the  conversation  by  saying : 

"  Well,  now  we  have  seen  what  we  have  to  depend  upon, 
we  must  begin  our  house  and  store-rooms.    We  have  ma- 


34  THE    DESERT    OF    ICE 

terials  enough  at  hand;  and,  Bell,  I  hope  you  are  going  to 
distinguish  yourself,"  he  added. 

"  I  am  ready,  Mr.  Clawbonny,"  replied  Bell ;  "  and  as  for 
material,  there  is  enough  for  a  town  here,  with  houses  and 
streets." 

"  We  don't  require  that;  we'll  content  ourselves  with  imi- 
tating the  Hudson's  Bay  Company.  They  entrench  them- 
selves in  fortresses  against  the  Indians  and  wild  beasts. 
That's  all  we  need — a  house  one  side  and  stores  the  other, 
with  a  wall  and  two  bastions.    I  must  try  to  make  a  plan." 

"Ah!  Doctor,  if  you  undertake  it,"  said  Johnson,  "I'm 
sure  you'll  make  a  good  thing  of  it." 

"  Well,  the  first  part  of  the  business  is  to  go  and  choose 
the  ground.    Will  you  come  with  us,  Hatteras?" 

"  I'll  trust  all  that  to  you,  Doctor,"  replied  the  captain. 
"  I'm  going  to  look  along  the  coast." 

Altamont  was  too  feeble  yet  to  take  part  in  any  work, 
so  he  remained  on  the  ship,  while  the  others  commenced 
to  explore  the  unknown  continent.  On  examining  the  coast, 
they  found  that  the  Porpoise  was  in  a  sort  of  bay  bristling 
with  dangerous  rocks,  and  that  to  the  west,  far  as  the  eye 
could  reach,  the  sea  extended,  entirely  frozen  now,  though 
if  Belcher  and  Penny  were  to  be  believed  open  during  the 
summer  months.  Towards  the  north,  a  promontory 
stretched  out  into  the  sea,  and  about  three  miles  away  was 
an  island  of  moderate  size.  The  roadstead  thus  formed 
would  have  afforded  safe  anchorage  to  ships,  but  for  the 
difficulty  of  entering  it.  A  considerable  distance  inland 
there  was  a  solitary  mountain,  about  3,000  feet  high,  by 
the  Doctor's  reckoning. 

Half-way  up  the  steep  rocky  cliffs  that  rose  from  the 
shore,  they  noticed  a  circular  plateau,  open  on  three  sides 
to  the  bay  and  sheltered  on  the  fourth  by  a  precipitous  wall, 
120  feet  high.  This  seemed  to  the  Doctor  the  very  place  for 
this  house,  from  its  naturally  fortified  situation.  By  cut- 
ting steps  in  the  ice,  they  managed  to  climb  up  and  examine 
it  more  closely. 

They  were  soon  convinced  they  could  not  have  a  better 
foundation,  and  resolved  to  commence  operations  forthwith, 
by  removing  the  hard  snow  more  than  ten  feet  deep,  which 
covered  the  ground,  as  both  dwelling  and  storehouses  must 
have  a  solid  foundation. 


THE   "PORPOISE"  33 

This  preparatory  work  occupied  the  whole  of  Monday, 
Tuesday,  and  Wednesday.  At  last  they  came  to  hard 
granite  close  in  grain,  and  containing  garnets  and  felspar 
crystals,  which  flew  out  with  every  stroke  of  the  pickax. 

The  dimensions  and  plan  of  the  snow-house  were  then 
settled  by  the  Doctor.  It  was  to  be  divided  into  three 
rooms,  as  all  they  needed  was  a  bedroom,  sitting-room, 
and  kitchen.  The  sitting-room  was  to  be  in  the  middle,  the 
kitchen  to  the  left,  and  the  bedroom  to  the  right. 

For  five  days  they  toiled  unremittingly.  There  was 
plenty  of  material,  and  the  walls  required  to  be  thick  enough 
to  resist  summer  thaws.  Already  the  house  began  to  pre- 
sent an  imposing  appearance.  There  were  four  windows 
in  front,  made  of  splendid  sheets  of  ice,  in  Esquimaux 
fashion,  through  which  the  light  came  softly  in  as  if  through 
frosted  glass. 

Outside  there  was  a  long  covered  passage  between  the 
two  windows  of  the  sitting-room.  This  was  the  entrance 
hall,  and  it  was  shut  in  by  a  strong  door  taken  from  the 
cabin  of  the  Porpoise.  The  Doctor  was  highly  delighted 
with  his  performance  when  all  was  finished,  for  though  it 
would  have  been  difficult  to  say  to  what  style  of  architecture 
it  belonged,  it  was  strong  and  that  was  the  chief  thing. 

The  next  business  was  to  move  in  all  the  furniture  of 
the  Porpoise.  The  beds  were  brought  first  and  laid  down 
round  the  large  stove  in  the  sleeping  room ;  then  came  chairs, 
tables,  arm-chairs,  cupboards,  and  benches  for  the  sitting- 
room,  and  finally  the  ship  furnaces  and  cooking  utensils  for 
the  kitchen.  Sails  spread  on  the  ground  did  duty  for  car- 
pets, and  also  served  for  inner  doors. 

The  walls  of  the  house  were  over  five  feet  thick,  and 
the  windows  resembled  portholes  for  cannon.  Every  part 
was  as  solid  as  possible,  and  what  more  was  wanted  ?  Yet 
if  the  Doctor  could  have  had  his  way,  he  would ^  have 
made  all  manner  of  ornamental  additions,  in  humble  imita- 
tion of  the  Ice  Palace  built  in  St.  Petersburgh  in  January, 
1740,  of  which  he  had  read  an  account. 

It  was  on  Easter  Sunday,  the  31st  of  March,  when  the 
travelers  installed  themselves  in  their  new  abode,  and  after 
holding  divine  service  in  the  sitting-room,  they  devoted  the 
remainder  of  the  day  to  rest. 

Next  morning  they  set  about  building  the  store-houses 


36  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

and  powder  magazine.  This  took  a  whole  week  longer,  in- 
cluding the  time  spent  in  unloading  the  vessel,  which  was 
a  task  of  considerable  difficulty,  as  the  temperature  was  so 
low  that  they  could  not  work  for  many  hours  at  a  time. 
At  length,  on  the  8th  of  April,  provisions,  fuel,  and  am- 
munition were  all  safe  on  terra  firma,  and  deposited  in 
their  respective  places.  A  sort  of  kennel  was  constructed  at 
a  little  distance  from  the  house  for  the  Greenland  dogs, 
which  the  Doctor  dignified  by  the  name  of  "  Dog  Palace." 
Duk  shared  his  master's  quarters. 

.  All  that  now  remained  to  be  done  was  to  put  a  parapet 
right  round  the  plateau  by  way  of  fortification.  By  the 
15th  this  was  also  completed,  and  the  snow-house  might 
bid  defiance  to  a  whole  tribe  of  Esquimaux,  or  any  other 
hostile  invaders,  if  indeed  any  human  beings  whatever  were 
to  be  found  on  this  unknown  continent ;  for  Hatteras,  who 
had  minutely  examined  the  bay  and  the  surrounding  coast, 
had  not  been  able  to  discover  the  least  vestiges  of  the  huts 
that  are  generally  met  with  on  shores  frequented  by  Green- 
land tribes.  The  shipwrecked  sailors  of  the  Porpoise  and 
Forward  seemed  to  be  the  first  whose  feet  had  ever  trod 
this  lone  region. 


CHAPTER  VII 

AN  IMPORTANT  DISCUSSION" 

While  all  these  preparations  for  winter  were  going  on, 
Altamont  was  fast  regaining  strength.  His  vigorous  con- 
stitution triumphed,  and  he  was  even  able  to  lend  a  helping 
hand  in  the  unlading  of  the  ship.  He  was  a  true  type  of 
the  American,  a  shrewd,  intelligent  man,  full  of  energy 
and  resolution;  enterprising,  bold,  and  ready  for  anything. 
He  was  a  native  of  New  York,  he  informed  his  com- 
panions, and  had  been  a  sailor  from  his  boyhood. 

The  Porpoise  had  been  equipped  and  sent  out  by  a  com- 
pany of  wealthy  merchants  belonging  to  the  States,  at  the 
head  of  which  was  the  famous  Grinnell. 

There  were  many  points  of  resemblance  between  Alta- 
mont and  Hatteras,  but  no  affinities.  Indeed,  any  simi- 
larity that  there  was  between  them,  tended  rather  to  create 
discord  than  to  make  the  men  friends.     With  a  greater 


AN   IMPORTANT   DISCUSSION  37 

show  of  frankness,  he  was  in  reality  far  more  deep  and 
crafty  than  Hatteras.  He  was  more  free  and  easy,  but  not 
so  true-hearted,  and  somehow  his  apparent  openness  did  not 
inspire  such  confidence  as  the  Englishman's  gloomy  reserve. 
The  Doctor  was  in  constant  dread  of  a  collision  between 
the  rival  captains,  and  yet  one  must  command  inevitably, 
and  which  should  it  be!  Hatteras  had  the  men,  but  Alta- 
mont  had  the  ship,  and  it  was  hard  to  say  whose  was  the 
better  right. 

It  required  all  the  Doctor's  tact  to  keep  things  smooth, 
for  the  simplest  conversation  threatened  to  lead  to  strife. 
At  last,  in  spite  of  all  his  endeavors,  an  outbreak  occurred 
on  the  occasion  of  a  grand  banquet  by  way  of  "  house- 
warming,"  when  the  new  habitation  was  completed. 

This  banquet  was  Dr.  Clawbonny's  idea.  He  was  head- 
cook,  and  distinguished  himself  by  the  concoction  of  a  won- 
derful pudding,  which  would  positively  have  done  no  dis- 
honor to  the  cuisine  of  the  Lord  Chancellor  of  England. 

Bell  most  opportunely  chanced  to  shoot  a  white  hare 
and  several  ptarmigans,  which  made  an  agreeable  variety 
from  the  pemmican  and  salt  meat. 

Clawbonny  was  master  of  the  ceremonies,  and  brought 
in  his  pudding,  adorning  himself  with  the  insignia  of  his 
office — a  big  apron,  and  a  knife  dangling  at  his  belt. 

As  Altamont  did  not  conform  to  the  teetotal  regime  of 
his  English  companions,  gin  and  brandy  were  set  on  the 
table  after  dinner,  and  the  others,  by  the  Doctor's  orders, 
joined  him  in  a  glass  for  once,  that  the  festive  occasion 
might  be  duly  honored.  When  the  different  toasts  were 
being  drunk,  one  was  given  to  the  United  States,  to  which 
Hatteras  made  no  response. 

This  important  business  over,  the  Doctor  introduced 
an  interesting  subject  of  conversation  by  saying:  "My 
friends,  it  is  not  enough  to  have  come  thus  far  in  spite  of 
so  many  difficulties ;  we  have  something  more  yet  10  do.  I 
propose  we  should  bestow  a  name  on  this  continent,  where 
we  have  found  friendly  shelter  and  rest,  and  not  only  on 
the  continent,  but  on  the  several  bays,  peaks,  and  promon- 
tories that  we  meet  with.  This  has  been  invariably  done  by 
navigators,  and  is  a  most  necessary  proceeding." 

"Quite  right,"  said  Johnson;  "when  once  a  place  is 
named,  it  takes  away  the  feeling  of  being  castaways." 


38  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

"Yes,"  added  Bell,  "and  we  might  be  going  on  some 
expedition  and  obliged  to  separate,  or  go  out  hunting,  and 
it  would  make  it  much  easier  to  find  one  another  if  each 
locality  had  a  definite  name." 

"  Very  well,  then,"  said  the  Doctor :  "  since  we  are  all 
agreed,  let  us  go  steadily  to  work." 

Hatteras  had  take  no  part  in  the  conversation  as  yet, 
but  seeing  all  eyes  fixed  on  him,  he  rose  at  last,  and  said : 
"  If  no  one  objects,  I  think  the  most  suitable  name  we  can 
give  our  house  is  that  of  its  skillful  architect,  the  best  man 
among  us.    Let  us  call  it '  Doctor's  House/  " 

"  Just  the  thing !  "  said  Bell. 

"  First  rate ! "  exclaimed  Johnson,  "  '  Doctor's  House ! '  " 

"  We  cannot  do  better,"  chimed  in  Altamont.  "  Hurrah 
for  Dr.  Clawbonny." 

Three  hearty  cheers  were  given,  in  which  Duk  joined 
lustily,  barking  his  loudest. 

"  It  is  agreed,  then,"  said  Hatteras,  "  that  this  house  is 
to  be  called  *  Doctor's  House.'  " 

The  Doctor,  almost  overcome  by  his  feelings,  modestly 
protested  against  the  honor;  but  he  was  obliged  to  yield 
to  the  wishes  of  his  friends,  and  the  new  habitation  was 
formally  named  "  Doctor's  House." 

"  Now,  then,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  let  us  go  on  to  name 
the  most  important  of  our  discoveries." 

"  There  is  that  immense  sea  which  surrounds  us,  unfur- 
rowed  as  yet  by  a  single  ship." 

"  A  single  ship ! "  repeated  Altamont.  "  I  think  you 
have  forgotten  the  Porpoise,  and  yet  she  certainly  did  not 
get  here  overland." 

"  Well,  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  believe  she  had," 
replied  Hatteras,  "to  see  on  what  she  lies  at  present." 

"True,  enough,  Hatteras,"  said  Altamont,  in  a  piqued 
tone;  "but,  after  all,  is  not  that  better  than  being  blown 
to  atoms,  like  the  Forward  ?  " 

Hatteras  was  about  to  make  some  sharp  -retort,  but 
Clawbonny  interposed.  "  It  is  not  a  question  of  ships,  my 
friends,"  he  said,  "  but  of  a  fresh  sea." 

"It  is  no  new  sea,"  returned  Altamont;  "it  is  in  every 
Polar  chart,  and  has  a  name  already.  It  is  called  the 
Arctic  Ocean,  and  I  think  it  would  be  very  inconvenient 
to  alter  its  designation.     Should  we  find  out  by-and-by, 


AN   IMPORTANT   DISCUSSION  39 

that,  instead  of  being  an  ocean  it  is  only  a  strait  or  gulf, 
it  will  be  time  enough  to  alter  it  then." 

"  So  be  it,"  said  Hatteras. 

"  Very  well,  that  is  an  understood  thing,  then,"  said 
the  Doctor,  almost  regretting  that  he  had  started  a  discus- 
sion so  pregnant  with  national  rivalries. 

"  Let  us  proceed  with  the  continent  where  we  find  our- 
selves at  present,"  resumed  Hatteras.  "I  am  not  aware 
that  any  name  whatever  has  been  affixed  to  it,  even  in  the 
most  recent  charts." 

He  looked  at  Altamont  as  he  spoke,  who  met  his  gaze 
steadily,  and  said :  "  Possibly  you  may  be  mistaken  again, 
Hatteras." 

"Mistaken!  What!  This  unknown  continent,  this 
yirgin  soil " 

"  Has  already  a  name,"  replied  Altamont,  coolly. 

Hatteras  was  silent,  but  his  lip  quivered. 

"  And  what  name  has  it,  then  ? "  asked  the  Doctor, 
rather  astonished  at  Altamont's  affirmation. 

"  My  dear  Clawbonny,"  replied  the  American,  "  it  is 
the  custom,  not  to  say  the  right,  of  every  navigator  to 
christen  the  soil  on  which  he  is  the  first  to  set  foot.  It  ap- 
pears to  me,  therefore,  that  it  is  my  privilege  and  duty  on 
this  occasion  to  exercise  my  prerogative,  and " 

"  But,  sir,"  interrupted  Johnson,  rather  nettled  at  his 
sang  froid. 

"  It  would  be  a  difficult  matter  to  prove  that  the  Porpoise 
did  not  come  here,  even  supposing  she  reached  this  coast 
by  land,"  continued  Altamont,  without  noticing  Johnson's 
protest.  "  The  fact  is  indisputable,"  he  added,  looking  at 
Hatteras. 

"  I  dispute  the  claim,"  said  the  Englishman,  restraining 
himself,  by  a  powerful  effort.  "To  name  a  country  you 
must  first  discover  it,  I  suppose,  and  that  you  certainly 
did  not  do.  Besides,  but  for  us,  where  would  you  have 
been,  sir,  at  this  moment,  pray?  Lying  twenty  feet  deep 
under  the  snow." 

"  And  without  me,  sir,"  retorted  Altamont,  hotly,  "  with- 
out me  and  my  ship,  where  would  you  all  be  at  this  mo- 
ment?    Dead,  from  cold  and  hunger." 

"  Come,  come,  friends,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  doirtget  to 
words;  all  that  can  be  easily  settled.     Listen  to  me." 


40  THE    DESERT    OF    ICE 

"  Mr.  Hatteras,"  said  Altamont,  "  is  welcome  to  name 
whatever  territories  he  may  discover,  should  he  succeed 
in  discovering  any;  but  this  continent  belongs  to  me.  I 
should  not  even  consent  to  its  having  two  names  like  Grin- 
nell's  Land,  which  is  also  called  Prince  Albert's  Land,  be- 
cause it  was  discovered  almost  simultaneously  by  an 
Englishman  and  an  American.  This  is  quite  another  mat- 
ter; my  right  of  priority  is  incontestable.  No  ship  before 
mine  ever  touched  this  shore;  no  foot  before  mine  ever 
trod  this  soil.  I  have  given  it  a  name,  and  that  name  it 
shall  keep." 

"  And  what  is  that  name  ?  "  inquired  the  Doctor. 

"  New  America,"  replied  Altamont. 

Hatteras  trembled  with  suppressed  passion,  but  by  a 
violent  effort  restrained  himself. 

"  Can  you  prove  to  me,"  said  Altamont,  "  that  an  Eng- 
lishman has  set  foot  here  before  an  American  ?  " 

Johnson  and  Bell  said  nothing,  though  quite  as  much 
offended   as  the   captain  by  Altamont's   imperious   tone. 

For  a  few  minutes  there  was  an  awkward  silence,  which 
the  Doctor  broke  by  saying :  "  My  friends,  the  highest  hu- 
man law  is  justice.  It  includes  all  others.  Let  us  be 
just,  then,  and  don't  let  any  bad  feeling  get  in  among  us. 
The  priority  of  Altamont  seems  to  me  indisputable.  We 
will  take  our  revenge  by  and  by,  and  England  will  get  her 
full  share  in  our  future  discoveries.  Let  the  name  New 
America  stand  for  the  continent  itself,  but  I  suppose  Alta- 
mont has  not  yet  disposed  of  all  the  bays,  and  capes,  and 
headlands  it  contains,  and  I  imagine  there  will  be  nothing 
to  prevent  us  calling  this  bay  Victoria  Bay?  " 

"  Nothing  whatever,  provided  that  yonder  cape  is  called 
Cape  Washington,"  replied  Altamont. 

"  You  might  choose  a  name,  sir,"  exclaimed  Hatteras, 
almost  beside  himself  with  passion,  "  that  is  less  offensive 
to  an  Englishman." 

"  But  not  one  which  sounds  so  sweet  to  an  American," 
retorted  Altamont,  proudly. 

"  Come,  come,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  no  discussion  on  that 
subject.  An  American  has  a  perfect  right  to  be  proud 
of  his  great  countryman!  Let  us  honor  genius  wherever 
it  is  met  with;  and  since  Altamont  has  made  his  choice, 
let  us  take  our  turn  next ;  let  the  captain " 


AN    IMPORTANT    DISCUSSION  41 

"  Doctor ! "  interrupted  Hatteras,  "  I  have  no  wish  that 
my  name  should  figure  anywhere  on  this  continent,  seeing 
that  it  belongs  to  America." 

"Is  this  your  unalterable  determination?"  asked  Claw- 
bonny. 

"  It  is." 

The  Doctor  did  not  insist  further. 

"  Very  well,  we'll  have  it  to  ourselves  then,"  he  contin- 
ued, turning  to  Johnson  and  Bell.  "  We'll  leave  our  traces 
behind  us.  I  propose  that  the  island  we  see  out  there, 
about  three  miles  away  from  the  shore,  should  be  called 
Isle  Johnson,  in  honor  of  our  boatswain." 

"  Oh,  Mr.  Clawbonny,"  began  Johnson,  in  no  little  con- 
fusion. 

"And  that  mountain  that  we  discovered  in  the  west  we 
will  call  Bell  Mount,  if  our  carpenter  is  willing." 

"  It  is  doing  me  too  much  honor,"  replied  Bell. 

"  It  is  simple  justice,"  returned  the  Doctor. 

"  Nothing  could  be  better,"  said  Altamont. 

"  Now  then,  all  we  have  to  do  is  to  christen  our  fort," 
said  the  Doctor.  "  About  that  there  will  be  no  discussion, 
I  hope,  for  it  is  neither  to  our  gracious  sovereign  Queen 
Victoria,  nor  to  Washington,  that  we  owe  our  safety  and 
shelter  here,  but  to  God,  who  brought  about  our  meeting, 
and  by  so  doing  saved  us  all.  Let  our  little  fort  be  called 
Fort  Providence." 

"Your  remarks  are  just,"  said  Altamont;  "no  name 
could  be  more  suitable." 

"Fort  Providence,"  added  Johnson,  "sounds  well  too. 
In  our  future  excursions,  then,  we  shall  go  by  Cape  Wash- 
ington to  Victoria  Bay,  and  from  thence  to  Fort  Provi- 
dence, where  we  shall  find  food  and  rest  at  Doctor's- 
House ! " 

"  The  business  is  settled  then  so  far,"  resumed  the  Doc- 
tor. "As  our  discoveries  multiply  we  shall  have  other 
names  to  give;  but  I  trust,  friends,  we  shall  have  no  dis- 
putes about  them,  for  placed  as  we  are,  we  need  all  the 
help  and  love  we  can  give  each  other.  Let  us  be  strong 
by  being  united.  Who  knows  what  dangers  yet  we  may 
have  to  brave,  and  what  sufferings  to  endure  before  we 
see  our  native  land  once  more.  Let  us  be  one  in  heart 
though  five  in  number,  and  let  us  lay  aside  all  feelings  of 


42  THE    DESERT    OF    ICE 

rivalry.  Such  feelings  are  bad  enough  at  all  times,  but 
among  us  they  would  be  doubly  wrong.  You  understand 
me,  Altamont,  and  you,  Hatteras  ?  " 

Neither  of  the  captains  replied,  but  the  Doctor  took  no 
notice  of  their  silence,  and  went  on  to  speak  of  other  things. 
Sundry  expeditions  were  planned  to  forage  for  fresh  food. 
It  would  soon  be  spring,  and  hares  and  partridges,  foxes 
and  bears,  would  re-appear.  So  it  was  determined  that 
part  of  every  day  should  be  spent  in  hunting  and  exploring 
this  unknown  continent  of  New  America. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

AN  EXCURSION  TO  THE  NORTH  OF  VICTORIA  BAY 

Next  morning  Clawbonny  was  out  by  dawn  of  day. 
Clambering  up  the  steep,  rocky  wall,  against  which  the 
Doctor's  House  leaned,  he  succeeded,  though  with  consid- 
erable difficulty,  in  reaching  the  top,  which  he  found  ter- 
minated abruptly  in  a  sort  of  truncated  cone.  From  this 
elevation  there  was  an  extensixe  view  over  a  vast  tract  of 
country,  which  was  all  disordered  and  convulsed  as  if  it 
had  undergone  some  volcanic  commotion.  Sea  and  land, 
as  far  as  it  was  possible  to  distinguish  one  from  the  other, 
were  covered  with  a  sheet  of  ice. 

A  new  project  struck  the  Doctor's  mind,  which  was  soon 
matured  and  ripe  for  execution.  Fie  lost  no  time  in  going 
back  to  the  snow  house,  and  consulting  over  it  with  his 
companions. 

"  I  have  got  an  idea,"  he  said ;  "  I  think  of  constructing 
a  lighthouse  on  top  of  that  cone  above  our  heads." 

"  A  lighthouse !  "  they  all  exclaimed. 

"Yes,  a  lighthouse.  It  would  be  a  double  advantage. 
It  would  be  a  beacon  to  guide  us  in  distant  excursions,  and 
also  serve  to  illumine  our  plateau  in  the  long  dreary  winter 
months." 

"There  is  no  doubt,"  replied  Altamont,  "of  its  utility; 
but  how  would  you  contrive  to  make  it?" 

"  With  one  of  the  lanterns  out  of  the  Porpoise"  replied 
the  Doctor. 

"  All  right ;  but  how  will  you  feed  your  lamp.  With 
seal  oil?" 


AN   EXCURSION   TO   VICTORIA   BAY      43 

"  No,  seal  oil  would  not  give  nearly  sufficient  light.  It 
would  scarcely  be  visible  through  the  fog." 

"  Are  you  going  to  try  to  make  gas  out  of  our  coal  ?  M 

"  No,  not  that  either,  for  gas  would  not  be  strong 
enough;  and,  worse  still,  it  would  waste  our  combustibles." 

"Well,"  replied  Altamont;  "I'm  at  a  loss  to  see  how 
you " 

"  Oh,  I'm  prepared  for  everything  after  the  mercury  bul- 
let, and  the  ice  lens,  and  Fort  Providence.  I  believe  Mr. 
Clawbonny  can  do  anything,"  exclaimed  Johnson. 

"  Come,  Clawbonny,  tell  us  what  your  light  is  to  be, 
then,"  said  Altamont. 

"That's  soon  told,"  replied  Clawbonny.  "I  mean  to 
have  an  electric  light." 

"An  electric  light?" 

"Yes,  why  not?  Haven't  you  a  galvanic  battery  on 
board  your  ship  ?  " 

"Yes." 

"  Well,  there  will  be  no  difficulty  then  in  producing  an 
electric  light,  and  that  will  cost  nothing,  and  be  far 
brighter." 

"  First-rate ! "  said  Johnson;  "  let  us  set  to  work  at  once." 

"By  all  means.  There  is  plenty  of  material.  In  an 
hour  we  can  raise  a  pillar  of  ice  ten  feet  high,  and  that  is 
quite  enough." 

Away  went  the  Doctor,  followed  by  his  companions,  and 
the  column  was  soon  erected  and  crowned  with  a  ship  lan- 
tern. The  conducting  wires  were  properly  adjusted  within 
it,  and  the  pile  with  which  they  communicated  fixed  up  in 
the  sitting-room,  where  the  warmth  of  the  stove  would 
protect  it  from  the  action  of  the  frost.  As  soon  as  it 
grew  dark  the  experiment  was  made,  and  proved  a  com- 
plete success.  An  intense  brilliant  light  streamed  from 
the  lantern  and  illumined  the  entire  plateau  and  the  plains 
beneath. 

Johnson  could  not  help  clapping  his  hands,  half  beside 
himself  with  delight. 

"Well,  I  declare,  Mr.  Clawbonny,"  he  exclaimed, 
"you're  our  sun  now."  M 

"One  must  be  a  little  of  everything,  you  know,  was 
Clawbonnv's  modest  reply.  .  _ 

It  was  too  cold,  however,  even  to  stand  admiring  more 


44  THE    DESERT    OF    ICE 

than  a  minute,  and  the  whole  party  were  glad  enough  to 
get  indoors  again,  and  tuck  themselves  up  in  their  warm 
blankets. 

A  regular  course  of  life  commenced  now,  though  the 
uncertain  weather  and  frequent  changes  of  temperature 
made  it  sometimes  impracticable  to  venture  outside  the 
hut  at  all,  and  it  was  not  till  the  Saturday  after  the  instal- 
lation, that  a  day  came  that  was  favorable  enough  for  a 
hunting  excursion;  when  Bell,  and  Altamont,  and  the  Doc- 
tor determined  to  take  advantage  of  it,  and  try  to  replenish 
their  stock  of  provisions. 

They  started  very  early  in  the  morning,  each  armed  with 
a  double-barreled  gun  and  plenty  of  powder  and  shot,  a 
hatchet,  and  a  snow  knife. 

The  weather  was  cloudy,  but  Clawbonny  put  the  gal- 
vanic battery  in  action  before  he  left,  and  the  bright  rays 
of  the  electric  light  did  duty  for  the  glorious  orb  of  day, 
and  in  truth  was  no  bad  substitute,  for  the  light  was  equal 
to  three  thousand  candles,  or  three  hundred  gas  burners. 

It  was  intensely  cold,  but  dry,  and  there  was  little  or  no 
wind.  The  hunters  set  off  in  the  direction  of  Cape  Wash- 
ington, and  the  hard  snow  so  favored  the  march,  that  in 
three  hours  they  had  gone  fifteen  miles,  Duk  jumping  and 
barking  beside  them  all  the  way.  They  kept  as  close  to 
the  coast  as  possible,  but  found  no  trace  of  human  habita- 
tion, and  indeed  scarcely  a  sign  of  animal  life.  A  few 
snow  birds,  however,  darting  to  and  fro,  announced  the 
approach  of  spring,  and  the  return  of  the  animal  creation. 
The  sea  was  still  entirely  frozen  over,  but  it  was  evident, 
from  the  open  breathing  holes  in  the  ice,  that  the  seals  had 
been  quite  recently  on  the  surface.  In  one  part  the  holes 
were  so  numerous  that  the  Doctor  said  to  his  comapnions 
that  he  had  no  doubt  that  when  summer  came,  they  would 
be  seen  there  in  hundreds,  and  would  be  easily  captured, 
for  on  unfrequented  shores  they  were  not  so  difficult  of  ap- 
proach. But  once  frighten  them  and  they  all  vanish  as  if 
by   enchantment,    and    never    return   to    the    spot    again. 

"Inexperienced  hunters,"  he  said,  "have  often  lost  a 
whole  shoal  by  attacking  them  en  masse,  with  noisy  shouts, 
instead  of  singly  and  silently." 

"  Is  it  for  the  oil  or  skin  that  they  are  mostly  hunted  ?  " 

"  Europeans  hunt  them  for  the  skin,  but  the  Esquimaux 


AN   EXCURSION    TO   VICTORIA   BAY       45 

eat  them.  They  live  on  seals,  and  nothing  is  so  delicious 
to  them  as  a  piece  of  the  flesh,  dipped  in  the  blood  and  oil. 
After  all,  cooking  has  a  good  deal  to  do  with  it,  and  I'll  bet 
you  something  I  could  dress  you  cutlets  you  would  not 
turn  your  nose  up  at,  unless  for  their  black  appearance." 

"  We'll  set  you  to  work  on  it,"  said  Bell,  "  and  I'll  eat 
as  much  as  you  like,  to  please  you." 

''My  good  Bell,  you  mean  to  say  to  please  yourself; 
but  your  voracity  would  never  equal  the  Greenlanders', 
for  they  devour  from  ten  to  fifteen  pounds  of  meat  a  day." 

"Fifteen  pounds!"  said  Bell.     "What  stomachs!" 

"  Arctic  stomachs,"  replied  the  Doctor,  "  are  prodigious ; 
they  can  expand  at  will,  and  I  may  add,  contract  at  will; 
so  that  they  can  endure  starvation  quite  as  well  as  abun- 
dance. When  an  Esquimaux  sits  down  to  dinner  he  is 
quite  thin,  and  by  the  time  he  has  finished  he  is  so  corpu- 
lent you  would  hardly  recognize  him.  But  then  we  must 
remember  that  one  meal  sometimes  has  to  last  a  whole  day." 

"  This  voracity  must  be  peculiar  to  the  inhabitants  of 
cold  countries,"  said  Altamont. 

"  I  think  it  is,"  replied  the  Doctor.  "  In  the  Arctic  re- 
gions people  must  eat  enormously ;  it  is  not  only  one  of  the 
conditions  of  strength,  but  of  existence.  The  Hudson's 
Bay  Company  always  reckoned  on  this  account  8  lbs.  of 
meat  to  each  man  a  day,  or  12  lbs.  of  fish,  or  2  lbs.  of  pem- 
mican." 

"  Invigorating  regimen,  certainly !  "  said  Bell. 

"  Not  so  much  as  you  imagine,  my  friend.  An  Indian 
who  guzzles  like  that  can't  do  a  whit  better  day's  work 
than  an  Englishman,  who  has  his  pound  of  beef  and  pint 
of  beer." 

"  Things  are  best  as  they  are,  then,  Mr.  Clawbonny." 

"  No  doubt  of  it;  and  yet  an  Esquimaux  meal  may  well 
astonish  us.  In  Sir  John  Ross's  narrative,  he  states  his 
surprise  at  the  appetites  of  his  guides.  He  tells  us  that 
two  of  them — just  two,  mind — devoured  a  quarter  of  a 
buffalo  in  one  morning.  They  cut  the  meat  in  long  narrow 
strips,  and  the  mode  of  eating  was  either  for  one  to  bite  off 
as  much  as  his  mouth  could  hold,  and  then  pass  it  pn  to  the 
other,  or  to  leave  the  long  ribbons  of  meat  dangling  from 
the  mouth,  and  devour  them  gradually,  like  the  boa-con- 
strictors, lying  at  full  length  on  the  ground." 


46  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

"  Faugh !  "  exclaimed  Bell,  "  what  disgusting  brutes !  " 

"  Every  man  has  his  own  fashion  of  dining,"  remarked 
the  philosophical  American. 

"  Happily,"  said  the  Doctor. 

"  Well,  if  eating  is  such  an  imperative  necessity  in  these 
latitudes,  it  quite  accounts  for  all  the  journals  of  Arctic 
travelers  being  so  full  of  eating  and  drinking." 

"  You  are  right,"  returned  the  Doctor.  "  I  have  been 
struck  by  the  same  fact ;  but  I  think  it  arises  not  only  from 
the  necessity  of  full  diet,  but  from  the  extreme  difficulty 
sometimes  in  procuring  it.  The  thought  of  food  is  always 
uppermost  in  the  mind,  and  naturally  finds  mention  in  the 
narrative." 

"And  yet,"  said  Altamont,  "if  my  memory  serves  me 
right,  in  the  coldest  parts  of  Norway  the  peasants  do  not 
seem  to  need  such  substantial  fare.  Milk  diet  is  their  sta- 
ple food,  with  eggs,  and  bread  made  of  the  bark  of  the 
birch-tree;  a  little  salmon  occasionally,  but  never  meat; 
and  still  they  are  fine  hardy  fellows." 

"  It  is  an  affair  of  organization  out  of  my  power  to  ex- 
plain," replied  Clawbonny;  "but  I  have  no  doubt  that  if 
these  same  Norwegians  were  transplanted  to  Greenland, 
they  would  learn  to  eat  like  the  Esquimaux  by  the  second 
or  third  generation.  Even  if  we  ourselves  were  to  remain 
in  this  blessed  country  long,  we  should  be  as  bad  as  the 
Esquimaux,  even  if  we  escaped  becoming  regular  gluttons." 

"  I  declare,  Mr.  Clawbonny,  you  make  me  feel  hungry 
with  talking  so  much  about  eating,"  exclaimed  Bell. 

"  Not  I !  "  said  Altamont.  "  It  rather  sickens  me,  and 
makes  me  loathe  the  sight  of  a  seal.  But,  stop,  I  do  believe 
we  are  going  to  have  the  chance  of  a  dinner  off  one;  for  I 
am  much  mistaken  if  that's  not  something  alive  lying  on 
those  lumps  of  ice  yonder !  " 

"  It  is  a  walrus ! "  exclaimed  the  Doctor.  "  Be  quiet, 
and  let  us  go  up  to  him." 

Clawbonny  was  right;  it  was  a  walrus  of  huge  dimen- 
sions, disporting  himself  not  more  than  two  hundred  yards 
away.  The  hunters  separated,  going  in  different  direc- 
tions, so  as  to  surround  the  animal  and  cut  off  all  retreat. 
They  crept  along  cautiously  behind  the  hummocks,  and 
managed  to  get  within  a  few  paces  of  him  unperceived, 
when  they  fired  simultaneously. 


AN   EXCURSION   TO   VICTORIA   BAY      47 

The  walrus  rolled  over,  but  speedily  got  up  again,  and 
tried  to  make  his  escape,  but  Altamont  fell  upon  him  with 
his  hatchet,  and  cut  off  his  dorsal  fins.  He  made  a  des- 
perate resistance,  but  was  overpowered  by  his  enemies, 
and  soon  lay  dead,  reddening  the  ice-field  with  his  blood. 

It  was  a  fine  animal,  measuring  more  than  fifteen  feet 
in  length,  and  would  have  been  worth  a  good  deal  for  the 
oil;  but  the  hunters  contented  themselves  with  cutting  off 
the  most  savory  parts,  and  left  the  rest  to  the  ravens,  who 
had  just  begun  to  make  their  appearance. 

Night  was  drawing  on,  and  it  was  time  to  think  of  re- 
turning to  Fort  Providence.  The  moon  had  not  yet  risen, 
but  the  sky  was  serene  and  cloudless,  and  already  glittering 
with  stars — magnificent  stars. 

"  Come,"  said  the  Doctor,  let  us  be  off,  for  it  is  getting 
late.  Our  hunting  has  not  been  very  successful;  but  still, 
if  a  man  has  found  something  for  his  supper,  he  need  not 
grumble.  Let  us  go  the  shortest  road,  however,  and  get 
quickly  home  without  losing  our  way.  The  stars  will 
guide  us." 

They  resolved  to  try  a  more  direct  route  back  by  going 
farther  inland,  and  avoiding  the  windings  of  the  coast; 
but,  after  some  hours'  walking,  they  found  themselves  no 
nearer  Doctor's  House,  and  it  was  evident  that  they  must 
have  lost  their  way.  The  question  was  raised  whether  to 
construct  a  hut,  and  rest  till  morning,  or  proceed;  but 
Clawbonny  insisted  on  going  on,  as  Hatteras  and  Johnson 
would  be  so  uneasy. 

"Duk  will  guide  us,"  he  said;  "he  won't  go  wrong. 
His  instinct  can  dispense  with  star  and  compass.  Just 
let  us  keep  close  behind  him." 

They  did  well  to  trust  to  Duk,  for  very  speedily  a  faint 
light  appeared  in  the  horizon  almost  like  a  star  glimmering 
through  the  mist,  which  hung  low  above  the  ground. 

"  There's  our  lighthouse !  "  exclaimed  the  Doctor. 

"Do  you  think  it  is,  Mr.  Clawbonny?"  said  Bell. 

"  I'm  certain  of  it !     Come  on  faster." 

The  light  became  stronger  the  nearer  they  approached, 
and  soon  they  were  walking  in  a  bright  luminous  track, 
leaving  their  long  shadows  behind  them  on  the  spotless 
snow.  They  hastened  forward,  and  in  another  half  hour 
they  were  climbing  the  ascent  to  Fort  Providence. 


CHAPTER    IX 

COLD  AND  HEAT 

Hatteras  and  Johnson  had  been  getting  somewhat  un- 
easy at  the  prolonged  absence  of  their  companions,  and 
were  delighted  to  see  them  back  safe  and  sound.  The 
hunters  were'  no  less  glad  to  find  themselves  once  more  in 
a  warm  shelter,  for  the  temperature  had  fallen  considerably 
as  night  drew  on,  and  the  thermometer  outside  was  far  be- 
low zero. 

The  poor  hunters  were  half  frozen,  and  so  worn  out  that 
they  could  hardly  drag  their  limbs  along;  but  the  stoves 
were  roaring  and  crackling  cheerily,  and  the  big  kitchen  fire 
waiting  to  cook  such  game  as  might  be  brought  in.  Claw- 
bonny  donned  his  official  apron  again,  and  soon  had  his 
seal  cutlets  dressed  and  smoking  on  the  table.  By  nine 
o'clock  the  whole  party  were  enjoying  a  good  supper,  and 
Bell  couldn't  help  exclaiming :  "  Well,  even  at  the  risk  of 
being  taken  for  an  Esquimaux,  I  must  confess  eating  is  the 
most  important  business  if  one  has  to  winter  in  these  re- 
gions.    A  good  meal  isn't  to  be  sneezed  at." 

They  all  had  their  mouths  crammed  too  full  to  speak, 
but  the  Doctor  signified  his  agreement  with  Bell's  views 
by  an  approving  nod. 

The  cutlets  were  pronounced  first-rate,  and  it  seemed  as 
if  they  were,  for  they  were  all  eaten,  to  the  very  last  mor- 
sel. For  dessert  they  had  coffee,  which  the  Doctor  brewed 
himself  in  a  French  coffee-pot  over  the  spirits-of-wine. 
He  never  allowed  anybody  but  himself  to  concoct  this  pre- 
cious beverage;  for  he  made  a  point  of  serving  it  boiling 
hot,  always  declaring  it  was  not  fit  to  drink  unless  it  burned 
his  tongue.  This  evening  he  took  it  so  scalding  that  Alta- 
mont  exclaimed : 

"  You'll  skin  your  throat!" 

"  Not  a  bit  of  it,"  was  the  Doctor's  reply. 

"  Then  your  palate  must  be  copper-sheathed,"  said  John- 
son. 

"  Not  at  all,  friends.  I  advise  you  to  copy  my  exam- 
ple. Many  persons,  and  I  am  one,  can  drink  coffee  at  a 
temperature  of  13 1°. 

"  1310?"  said  Altamont;  "why,  that  is  hotter  than  the 
hand  could  bear !  " 

"Of  course  it  is,  Altamont,  for  the  hand  could  not  bear 

V.  Ill  Verne  43 


COLD   AND    HEAT  49 

more  than  122°,  but  the  palate  and  tongue  are  less  sensi- 
tive." 

"  You  surprise  me." 

"  Well,  I  will  convince  you  it  is  fact,"  returned  Claw- 
bonny,  and  taking  up  a  thermometer,  he  plunged  it  into 
the  steaming  coffee.  He  waited  till  the  mercury  rose  as 
high  as  13 1  °  and  then  withdrew  it,  and  swallowed  the  liquid 
with  evident  gusto. 

Bell  tried  to  follow  his  example,  but  burned  his  mouth 
severely. 

"  You  are  not  used  to  it,"  said  the  Doctor,  coolly. 

"  Can  you  tell  us,  Clawbonny,"  asked  Altamont,  "  what 
is  the  highest  temperature  that  the  human  body  can  bear." 

"  Yes ;  several  curious  experiments  have  been  made  in 
that  respect.  I  remember  reading  of  some  servant  girls, 
in  the  town  of  Rochefoucauld,  in  France,  who  could  stay 
ten  minutes  in  a  baker's  large  oven  when  the  temperature 
was  3000,  while  potatoes  and  meat  were  cooking  all  round 
them." 

"  What  girls !  "  exclaimed  Altamont. 

"  Well,  there  is  another  case,  where  eight  of  our  own 
countrymen — Fordyce,  Banks,  Solander,  Blagdin,  Home, 
Nooth,  Lord  Sea  forth,  and  Captain  Phillips — went  into  one 
as  hot  as  2000,  where  eggs  and  beef  were  frizzling." 

"And  they  were  Englishmen!"  said  Bell,  with  a  touch 
of  national  pride. 

"  Oh,  the  Americans  could  have  done  better  than  that," 
said  Altamont. 

"  They  would  have  roasted,"  returned  the  Doctor,  laugh- 
ing. "At  all  events,  they  have  never  tried  it,  so  I  shall 
stand  up  for  my  countrymen.  There  is  one  more  instance 
I  recollect,  and  really  it  is  so  incredible  that  it  would  be  im- 
possible to  believe  it  if  it  were  not  attested  by  unimpeach- 
able evidence.  The  Duke  of  Ragusa  and  Dr.  Jung,  a 
Frenchman  and  an  Austrian,  saw  a  Turk  plunge  into  a 
bath  at  1700." 

"  But  that  is  not  so  astonishing  as  those  servant  girls, 
or  our  own  countrymen,"  said  Johnson. 

"I  beg  your  pardon,"  replied  Clawbonny;  "there  is  a 
great  difference  between  plunging  into  hot  air  and  hot  wa- 
ter. Hot  air  produces  perspiration,  which  protects  the 
skin,  but  boiling  water  scalds.     The  maximum  heat  of 


50  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

baths  is  1070,  so  that  this  Turk  must  have  been  an  extra- 
ordinary fellow  to  endure  such  temperature." 

"  What  is  the  mean  temperature,  Mr.  Clawbonny,  of  ani- 
mated beings?  "  asked  Johnson. 

"  That  varies  with  the  species,"  replied  the  Doctor. 
"  Birds  have  the  highest,  especially  the  duck  and  the  hen. 
The  mammalia  come  next,  and  human  beings.  The  tem- 
perature of  Englishmen  averages  1010." 

"  I  am  sure  Mr.  Altamont  is  going  to  claim  a  higher  rate 
for  his  countrymen,"  said  Johnson,  smiling. 

"  Well,  sure  enough,  we've  some  precious  hot  ones  among 
us,  but,  as  I  never  have  put  a  thermometer  down  their 
throats  to  ascertain,  I  can't  give  you  statistics." 

"  There  is  no  sensible  difference,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  be- 
tween men  of  different  races  when  they  are  placed  under 
the  same  conditions,  whatever  their  food  may  be.  I  may  al- 
most say  their  temperature  would  be  the  same  at  the  Equa- 
tor as  the  Pole." 

"Then  the  heat  of  our  bodies  is  the  same  here  as  in 
England,"  replied  Altamont. 

"Just  about  it.  The  other  species  of  mammalia  are 
generally  hotter  than  human  beings.  The  horse,  the  hare, 
the  elephant,  the  porpoise,  and  the  tiger  are  nearly  the 
same;  but  the  cat,  the  squirrel,  the  rat,  the  panther,  the 
sheep,  the  ox,  the  dog,  the  monkey  and  the  goat,  are  as 
high  as  1030  ;  and  the  pig  is  1040." 

"  Rather  humiliating  to  us,"  put  in  Altamont. 

"Then  come  the  amphibia  and  the  fish,"  resumed  the 
Doctor,  "  whose  temperature  varies  with  that  of  the  water. 
The  serpent  has  a  temperature  of  8o°,  the  frog  70°,  and  the 
shark  several  degrees  less.  Insects  appear  to  have  the  tem- 
perature of  air  and  water." 

"All  this  is  very  well,"  interrupted  Hatteras,  who  had 
hitherto  taken  no  part  in  the  conversation,  "and  we  are 
obliged  to  the  Doctor  for  his  scientific  information;  but 
we  are  really  talking  as  if  we  were  going  to  brave  the  heat 
of  the  torrid  zone.  I  think  it  would  be  far  more  season- 
able to  speak  of  cold,  if  the  Doctor  could  tell  us  what  is 
the  lowest  temperature  on  record?  " 

"I  can  enlighten  you  on  that  too,"  replied  the  Doctor. 
"  There  are  a  great  number  of  memorable  winters,  which 
appear  to  have  come  at  intervals  of  about  forty-one  years. 


COLD   AND   HEAT  '51 

In  1364,  the  Rhone  was  frozen  over  as  far  as  Aries;  in 
1408,  the  Danube  was  frozen  throughout  its  entire  extent, 
and  the  wolves  crossed  the  Cattigut  on  firm  ground;  in 
1509,  the  Adriatic  and  the  Mediterranean  were  frozen  at 
Venice  and  Marseilles,  and  the  Baltic  on  the  10th  of  April; 
in  1608,  all  the  cattle  died  in  England  from  the  cold;  in 
1789,  the  Thames  was  frozen  as  far  as  Gravesend;  and  the 
frightful  winter  of  1813  will  long  be  remembered  in 
France.  The  earliest  and  longest  ever  known  in  the  pres- 
ent century  was  in  1829.     So  much  for  Europe." 

"But  here,  within  the  Polar  circle,  what  is  the  lowest 
degree  ?  "  asked  Altamont. 

"My  word!"  said  the  Doctor.  "I  think  we  have  ex- 
perienced the  lowest  ourselves,  for  one  day  the  thermometer 
was  J2°  below  zero;  and,  if  my  memory  serves  me  right, 
the  lowest  temperature  mentioned  hitherto  by  Arctic  voy- 
agers has  been  61  °  at  Melville  Island,  65  °  at  Port  Felix, 
and  700  at  Fort  Reliance." 

"  Yes,"  said  Hatteras,  "  for  it  was  the  unusual  severity 
of  the  winter  that  barred  our  progress,  for  it  came  on  just 
at  the  worst  time  possible." 

"You  were  stopped,  you  say?"  asked  Altamont,  look- 
ing fixedly  at  the  captain. 

"  Yes,  in  our  voyage  west,"  the  Doctor  hastened  to  reply. 

"  Then  the  maximum  and  minimum  temperatures,"  said 
Altamont,  resuming  the  conversation,  "are  about  2000 
apart.  So  you  see,  my  friends,  we  may  make  ourselves 
easy." 

"  But  if  the  sun  were  suddenly  extinguished,"  suggested 
Johnson,  "would  not  the  earth's  temperature  be  far 
lower?" 

"There  is  no  fear  of  such  a  catastrophe;  but,  even 
should  it  happen,  the  temperature  would  be  scarcely  any 
different." 

"  That's  curious." 

"  It  is ;  but  Fourrier,  a  learned  Frenchman,  has  proved 
the  fact  incontestably.  If  it  were  not  the  case,  the  differ- 
ence between  day  and  night  would  be  far  greater,  as  also 
the  degree  of  cold  at  the  Poles.  But  now,  I  think,  friends, 
we  should  be  the  better  of  a  few  hours'  sleep.  Who  has 
charge  of  the  stove?  " 

"  It  is  my  turn  to-night,"  said  Bell. 


52  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

"  Well,  pray  keep  up  a  good  fire,  for  it  is  a  perishing 

night." 

"  Trust  me  for  that,"  said  Bell.  "  But  do  look  out,  the 
sky  is  all  in  a  blaze." 

"  Ay !  it  is  a  magnificent  aurora,"  replied  the  Doctor,  go- 
ing up  to  the  window.  "How  beautiful!  I  never  tire 
gazing  at  it." 

No  more  he  ever  did,  though  his  companions  had  become 
so  used  to  such  displays,  that  they  hardly  noticed  them 
now.  He  soon  followed  the  example  of  the  others,  how- 
ever, and  lay  down  on  his  bed  beside  the  fire,  leaving  Bell 
to  mount  guard. 


CHAPTER   X 

WINTER  PLEASURES 

It  is  a  dreary  affair  to  live  at  the  Pole,  for  there  is  no 
going  out  for  many  long  months,  and  nothing  to  break 
the  weary  monotony. 

The  day  after  the  hunting  excursion  was  dark  and 
snowy,  and  Clawbonny  could  find  no  occupation  except  pol- 
ishing up  the  ice  walls  of  the  hut  as  they  became  damp  with 
the  heat  inside,  and  emptying  out  the  snow  which  drifted 
into  the  long  passage  leading  to  the  inner  door.  The 
"  Snow-House  "  stood  out  well,  defying  storm  and  tempest, 
and  the  snow  only  seemed  to  increase  the  thickness  of  the 
walls. 

The  storehouses,  too,  did  not  give  way  the  least;  but 
though  they  were  only  a  few  yards  off,  it  was  found  neces- 
sary to  lay  in  enough  provisions  for  the  day,  as  very  often 
the  weather  made  it  almost  impossible  to  venture  that  short 
distance. 

The  unloading  of  the  Porpoise  turned  out  to  have  been 
a  wise  precaution,  for  she  was  slowly  but  surely  being 
crushed  to  pieces  by  the  silent,  irresistible  pressure  around 
her.  Still  the  Doctor  was  always  hoping  enough  planks 
might  be  sufficiently  sound  to  construct  a  small  vessel  to 
convey  them  back  to  England;  but  the  right  time  to  build 
had  not  yet  come. 

The  five  men  were  consequently  compelled  to  spend  the 
greater  part  of  the  day  in  complete  idleness.     Hatteras 


WINTER   PLEASURES  53 

lolled  on  his  bed  absorbed  in  thought.  Altamont  smoked 
or  dozed,  and  the  Doctor  took  care  not  to  disturb  either  of 
them,  for  he  was  in  perpetual  fear  of  a  quarrel  between 
them. 

At  meal  times  he  always  led  the  conversation  away  from 
irritating  topics,  and  sought,  as  far  as  possible,  to  instruct 
and  interest  all  parties.  Whenever  he  was  not  engaged 
with  the  preparation  of  his  notes,  he  gave  them  disserta- 
tions on  history,  geography,  or  meteorology,  handling  his 
subject  in  an  easy,  though  philosophical  manner,  drawing 
lessons  from  the  most  trivial  incidents.  His  inexhaustible 
memory  was  never  at  a  loss  for  fact  or  illustration,  while 
his  good  humor  and  geniality  made  him  the  life  and  soul 
of  the  little  company.  He  was  implicitly  trusted  by  all, 
even  by  Hatteras,  who  cherished  a  deep  affection  for  him. 

Yet  no  man  felt  the  compulsory  confinement  more  pain- 
fully than  Clawbonny.  He  longed  ardently  for  the  break- 
ing up  of  the  frost,  to  resume  his  excursions,  though  he 
dreaded  the  rivalry  that  might  ensue  between  the  two  cap- 
tains. 

Yet  things  must  come  to  a  crisis  soon  or  late,  and  mean- 
time he  resolved  to  use  his  best  endeavors  to  bring  both 
parties  to  a  better  mind,  but  to  reconcile  an  American  and 
an  Englishman  was  no  easy  task.  He  and  Johnson  had 
many  a  talk  on  the  subject,  for  the  old  sailor's  views  quite 
coincided  with  his  own  as  to  the  difficult  complications 
which  awaited  them  in  the  future. 

However,  the  bad  weather  continued,  and  leaving  Fort 
Providence,  even  for  an  hour,  was  out  of  the  question. 
Day  and  night  they  were  pent  up  in  these  glittering  ice- 
walls,  and  time  hung  heavily  on  their  hands,  at  least  on 
all  but  the  Doctor's,  and  he  always  managed  to  find  some 
occupation  for  himself. 

"  I  declare,"  said  Altamont  one  evening,  "  life  like  this 
is  not  worth  having!  We  might  as  well  be  some  of  those 
reptiles  that  sleep  all  the  winter.  But  I  suppose  there  is 
no  help  for  it." 

"I  am  afraid  not,"  said  the  Doctor;  "unfortunately  we 
are  too  few  in  number  to  get  up  any  amusement." 

"Then  you  think  if  there  were  more  of  us,  we  should 
find  more  to  do  ?  " 

"Of  course:  when  whole  ships'  crews  have  wintered 


54  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

here,  they  have  managed  to  while  away  the  time  famously." 

"  Well,  I  must  say  I  should  like  to  know  how.  It  would 
need  a  vast  amount  of  ingenuity  to  extract  anything  amus- 
ing out  of  our  circumstances.  I  suppose  they  did  not  play 
at  charades  ?  " 

"  No,  but  they  introduced  the  press  and  the  theater." 

"What?  They  had  a  newspaper?"  exclaimed  the 
American. 

"They  acted  a  comedy? "  said  Bell. 

"  That  they  did,"  said  the  Doctor.  "  When  Parry  win- 
tered at  Melville  Island,  he  started  both  amusements  among 
his  men,  and  they  met  with  great  success." 

"  Well,  I  must  confess,  I  should  like  to  have  been  there," 
returned  Johnson;  "  for  it  must  have  been  rather  curious 
work." 

"Curious  and  amusing  too,  my  good  Johnson.  Lieu- 
tenant Beechey  was  the  theater  manager,  and  Captain 
Sabina  chief  editor  of  the  newspaper  called  The  Winter 
Chronicle,  or  the  Gazette  of  Northern  Georgia. 

"  Good  titles,"  said  Altamont. 

"The  newspaper  appeared  daily  from  the  ist  of  No- 
vember, 1819,  to  the  20th  of  March,  1820.  It  reported  the 
different  excursions,  and  hunting  parties,  and  accidents, 
and  adventures,  and  published  amusing  stories.  No  doubt 
the  articles  were  not  up  to  the  Spectator  or  the  Daily  Tele- 
graph, but  the  readers  were  neither  critical  nor  blase,  and 
found  great  pleasure  in  their  perusal." 

"  My  word ! "  said  Altamont.  "  I  should  like  to  read 
some  of  the  articles." 

"Would  you?    Well,  you  shall  judge  for  yourself." 

"  What!  can  you  repeat  them  from  memory?  " 

"  No ;  but  you  had  Parry's  Voyages  on  board  the  Por- 
poise, and  I  can  read  you  his  own  narrative  if  you  like." 

This  proposition  was  so  eagerly  welcomed  that  the  Doc- 
tor fetched  the  book  forthwith,  and  soon  found  the  passage 
in  question. 

"  Here  is  a  letter,"  he  said,  "  addressed  to  the  editor : 

"  '  Your  proposition  to  establish  a  journal  has  been  re- 
ceived by  us  with  the  greatest  satisfaction.  I  am  convinced 
that,  under  your  directions,  it  will  be  a  great  source  of 
amusement,  and  go  a  long  way  to  lighten  our  hundred  days 
of  darkness. 


WINTER   PLEASURES  55 

" '  The  interest  I  take  in  the  matter  myself  has  led  me 
to  study  the  effect  of  your  announcement  on  my  comrades, 
and  I  can  testify,  to  use  reporter's  language,  that  the  thing 
has  produced  an  immense  sensation. 

"  '  The  day  after  your  prospectus  appeared,  there  was 
an  unusual  and  unprecedented  demand  for  ink  among  us, 
and  our  green  table-cloth  was  deluged  with  snippings  and 
parings  of  quill-pens,  to  the  injury  of  one  of  our  servants, 
who  got  a  piece  driven  right  under  his  nail.  I  know  for 
a  fact  that  Sergeant  Martin  had  no  less  than  nine  pen- 
knives to  sharpen. 

" '  It  was  quite  a  novel  sight  to  see  all  the  writing-desks 
brought  out,  which  had  not  made  their  appearance  for  a 
couple  of  months,  and  judging  by  the  reams  of  paper  vis- 
ible, more  than  one  visit  must  have  been  made  to  the  depths 
of  the  hold. 

" '  I  must  not  forget  to  tell  you,  that  I  believe  attempts 
will  be  made  to  slip  into  your  box  sundry  articles  which 
are  not  altogether  original,  as  they  have  been  published  al- 
ready. I  can  declare  that  no  later  than  last  night  I  saw  an 
author  bending  over  his  desk,  holding  a  volume  of  the 
Spectator  open  with  one  hand,  and  thawing  the  frozen 
ink  in  his  pen  at  the  lamp  with  the  other.  I  need  not  warn 
you  to  be  on  your  guard  against  such  tricks,  for  it  would 
never  do  for  us  to  have  articles  in  our  Winter  Chronicle 
which  our  great-grandfathers  read  over  their  breakfast- 
tables  a  century  ago.' " 

"  Well,  well,"  said  Altamont,  "  there  is  a  good  deal  of 
clever  humor  in  that  writer.  He  must  have  been  a  sharp 
fellow." 

"  You're  right.  Here  is  an  amusing  catalogue  of  Arctic 
tribulations  : 

"  '  To  go  out  in  the  morning  for  a  walk,  and  the  mo- 
ment you  put  your  foot  outside  the  ship,  find  yourself  im- 
mersed in  the  cook's  water-hole. 

"  '  To  go  out  hunting,  and  fall  in  with  a  splendid  rein- 
deer, take  aim,  and  find  your  gun  has  gone  off  with  a  flash 
in  the  pan,  owing  to  damp  powder. 

"'To  set  out  on  a  march  with  a  good  supply  of  soft 
new  bread  in  your  pocket,  and  discover,  when  you  want 
to  eat,  that  it  has  frozen  so  hard  that  you  would  break  your 
teeth  if  you  attempted  to  bite  it  through. 


56  THE   DESERT    OF    ICE 

"  '  To  rush  from  the  table  when  it  is  reported  that  a  wolf 
is  in  sight,  and  on  coming  back  to  find  the  cat  has  eaten 
your  dinner. 

" '  To  be  returning  quietly  home  from  a  walk,  absorbed 
in  profitable  meditation,  and  suddenly  find  yourself  in  the 
embrace  of  a  bear/ 

"  We  might  supplement  this  list  ourselves,"  said  the  Doc- 
tor, "  to  almost  any  amount,  for  there  is  a  sort  of  pleasure 
in  enumerating  troubles  when  one  has  got  the  better  of 
them." 

"  I  declare,"  said  Altamont,  "  this  Winter  Journal  is  an 
amusing  affair.    I  wish  we  could  subscribe  to  it." 

"  Suppose  we  start  one,"  said  Johnson. 

"For  us  five!"  exclaimed  Clawbonny;  "we  might  do 
for  editors,  but  there  would  not  be  readers  enough." 

"  No,  nor  spectators  enough,  if  we  tried  to  get  up  a 
comedy,"  added  Altamont. 

"  Tell  us  some  more  about  Captain  Parry's  theater,"  said 
Johnson ;  "  did  they  play  new  pieces  ?  " 

"  Certainly.  At  first  two  volumes  on  board  the  Hecla 
were  gone  through,  but  as  there  was  a  performance  once  a 
fortnight,  this  repertoire  was  soon  exhausted.  Then  they 
had  to  improvise  fresh  plays;  Parry  himself  composed  one 
which  had  immense  success.  It  was  called  '  The  Northwest 
Passage;  or,  '  The  End  of  the  Voyage.'" 

"A  famous  title,"  said  Altamont;  "but  I  must  confess, 
if  I  had  chosen  such  a  subject,  I  should  have  been  at  a  loss 
for  the  denouement." 

"  You  are  right,"  said  Bell ;  "  who  can  say  what  the  end 
will  be?" 

"What  does  that  matter?"  replied  Mr.  Clawbonny. 
"  Why  should  we  trouble  about  the  last  act,  while  the  first 
ones  are  going  on  well.  Leave  all  that  to  Providence, 
friends;  let  us  each  play  our  own  role  as  perfectly  as  we 
can,  and  since  the  denouement  belongs  to  the  Great  Author 
of  all  things,  we  will  trust  his  skill.  He  will  manage  our 
affairs  for  us,  never  fear." 

"  Well,  we'd  better  go  and  dream  about  it,"  said  John- 
son, "  for  it's  getting  late,  and  it  is  time  we  went  to  bed." 

"You're  in  a  great  hurry,  old  fellow,"  replied  the  Doc- 
tor. 

"  Why  would  you  sit  up,  Mr.  Clawbonny.  I  am  so  com- 


WINTER   PLEASURES  57 

fortable  in  my  bed,  and  then  I  always  have  such  good 
dreams.  I  dream  invariably  of  hot  countries,  so  that  I  might 
almost  say,  half  my  life  is  spent  in  the  tropics,  and  half  at 
the  North  Pole." 

"You're  a  happy  man,  Johnson,"  said  Altamont,  "to 
be  blessed  with  such  a  fortunate  organization." 

"  Indeed  I  am,"  replied  Johnson. 

"  Well,  come,  after  that  it  would  be  positive  cruelty  to 
keep  our  good  friend  pining  here,"  said  the  Doctor;  "his 
tropical  sun  awaits  him,  so  let's  all  go  to  bed." 


CHAPTER  XI 

TRACES  OF  BEARS 

On  the  26th  of  April,  during  the  night,  there  was  a  sudden 
change  in  the  weather.  The  thermometer  fell  several  de- 
grees, and  the  inmates  of  Doctor's  House  could  hardly  keep 
themselves  warm  even  in  their  beds.  Altamont  had  charge 
of  the  stove,  and  he  found  it  needed  careful  replenishing  to 
preserve  the  temperature  at  500  above  zero. 

This  increase  of  cold  betokened  the  cessation  of  the 
stormy  weather,  and  the  Doctor  hailed  it  gladly  as  the  har- 
binger of  his  favorite  hunting  and  exploring  expeditions. 

He  rose  early  next  morning,  and  climbed  up  to  the  top 
of  the  cone.  The  wind  had  shifted  north,  the  air  was  clear, 
and  the  snow  firm  and  smooth  to  the  tread. 

Before  long  the  five  companions  had  left  Doctor's  House, 
and  were  busily  engaged  in  clearing  the  heavy  masses  of 
snow  off  the  roof  and  sides,  for  the  house  was  no_  longer 
distinguishable  from  the  plateau,  as  the  snow  had  drifted  to 
a  depth  of  full  fifteen  feet.  It  took  two  hours  to  remove 
the  frozen  snow,  and  restore  the  architectural  form  of  the 
dwelling.  At  length  the  granite  foundations  appeared,  and 
the  storehouses  and  powder  magazines  were  once  more 
accessible.  ,  „ 

But  as,  in  so  uncertain  a  climate,  a  storm  might  cut  off 
their  supplies  any  day,  they  wisely  resolved  to  provide  for 
any  such  emergency  by  carrying  over  a  good  stock  of  pro- 
visions to  the  kitchen;  and  then  Clawbonny,  Altamont,  and 
Bell  started  off  with  their  guns  in  search  of  game,  for  the 
want  of  fresh  food  began  to  be  urgently  felt. 


58  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

The  three  companions  went  across  the  east  side  of  the 
cone,  right  down  into  the  center  of  the  far-stretching,  snow- 
covered  plain  beneath,  but  they  did  not  need  to  go  far,  for 
numerous  traces  of  animals  appeared  on  all  sides  within  a 
circle  of  two  miles  round  Fort  Providence. 

After  gazing  at  these  traces  for  some  minutes,  the  hunt- 
ers looked  at  each  other  silently,  then  the  Doctor  exclaimed : 

"  Well,  these  are  plain  enough,  I  think !  " 

"Ay,  only  too  plain,"  added  Bell;  "bears  have  been 
here!" 

"  First-rate  game ! "  said  Altamont.  "  There's  only  one 
fault  about  it." 

"  And  what  is  that?  "  asked  Bell. 

"  Too  much  of  it." 

"  What  do  you  mean?  " 

"  I  mean  this — there  are  distinct  traces  of  five  bears." 

"  Are  you  sure  there  are  five?  "  said  Clawbonny. 

"  Look  and  see  for  yourself.  Here  is  one  footprint,  and 
there  is  another  quite  different.  These  claws  are  far  wider 
apart  than  those ;  and  see  here,  again,  that  paw  belongs  to  a 
much  smaller  bear.  I  tell  you,  if  you  look  carefully,  you 
will  see  the  marks  of  all  five  different  bears  distinctly." 

"  You're  right,"  said  Bell,  after  a  close  inspection. 

"If  that's  the  case,  then,"  said  the  Doctor,  "we  must 
take  care  what  we're  about,  and  not  be  foolhardy,  for  these 
animals  are  starving  after  the  severe  winter,  and  they  might 
be  extremely  dangerous  to  encounter,  and,  since  we  are  sure 
of  their  number " 

"  And  of  their  intentions,  too,"  put  in  Altamont. 

"  You  think  they  have  discovered  our  presence  here?  " 

"  No  doubt  of  it,  unless  we  have  got  into  a  bear-pass,  but 
then,  why  should  these  footprints  be  in  a  circle  round 
our  fort.  Look,  these  animals  have  come  from  the  south- 
east, and  stopped  at  this  place,  and  commenced  to  recon- 
noiter  the  coast." 

"  You're  right,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  and,  what's  more,  it  is 
certain  that  they  have  been  here  last  night." 

"  And  other  nights  before  that,"  replied  Altamont. 

"I  don't  think  so,"  rejoined  Clawbonny.  "It  is  more 
likely  that  they  waited  till  the  cessation  of  the  tempest,  and 
were  on  their  way  down  to  the  bay,  intending  to  catch  seals, 
when  they  scented  us." 


TRACES   OF  BEARS  59 

"  Well,  we  can  easily  find  out  if  they  come  to-night,"  said 
Altamont. 

"How?" 

"  By  effacing  all  the  marks  in  a  given  place,  and  if  to- 
morrow we  find  fresh  ones,  it  will  be  evident  that  Fort 
Providence  is  the  goal  for  which  the  bears  are  bound." 

"  Very  good,  at  any  rate  we  shall  know,  then,  what  we 
have  to  expect." 

The  three  hunters  set  to  work,  and  scraped  the  snow  over 
till  all  the  footprints  were  obliterated  for  a  considerable  dis- 
tance. 

"It  is  singular,  though,"  said  Bell,  "that  bears  could 
scent  us  all  that  way  off?  We  have  not  been  burning  any- 
thing fat  which  might  have  attracted  them." 

"  Oh !  "  replied  the  Doctor,  "  bears  are  endowed  with  a 
wonderfully  keen  sense  of  smell  and  a  piercing  sight;  and, 
more  than  that,  they  are  extremely  intelligent,  almost  more 
so  than  any  other  animal.  They  have  smelt  something  un- 
usual ;  and  besides,  who  can  tell  whether  they  have  not  even 
found  their  way  as  far  as  our  plateau  during  the  tempest?  " 

"But  then,  why  did  they  stop  here  last  night?"  asked 
Altamont. 

"  Well,  that's  a  question  I  can't  answer,  but  there  is  no 
doubt  they  will  continue  narrowing  their  circles,  till  they 
reach  Fort  Providence." 

"  We  shall  soon  see,"  said  Altamont. 

"  And,  meantime,  we  had  best  go  on,"  added  the  Doctor, 
"  and  keep  a  sharp  look-out." 

But  not  a  sign  of  anything  living  was  visible,  and  after 
a  time  they  returned  to  the  snow-house. 

Hatteras  and  Johnson  were  informed  how  matters  stood, 
and  it  was  resolved  to  maintain  a  vigilant  watch.  Night 
came,  but  nothing  disturbed  its  calm  splendor — nothing  was 
heard  to  indicate  approaching  danger. 

Next  morning  at  early  dawn,  Hatteras  and  his  com- 
panions, well  armed,  went  out  to  reconnoiter  the  state  of  the 
snow.  They  found  the  same  identical  footmarks,  but  some- 
what nearer.  Evidently  the  enemy  was  bent  on  the  siege 
of  Fort  Providence. 

"  But  where  can  the  bears  be?  "  said  Bell. 

"  Behind  the  icebergs  watching  us,"  replied  the  Doctor. 
"  Don't  let  us  expose  ourselves  imprudently." 


60  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

"  What  about  going  hunting,  then  ?  "  asked  Altamont. 

"  We  must  put  it  off  for  a  day  or  two,  I  think,  and  rub 
out  the  marks  again,  and  see  if  they  are  renewed  to-mor- 
row." 

The  Doctor's  advice  was  followed,  and  they  entrenched 
themselves  for  the  present  in  the  fort.  The  lighthouse  was 
taken  down,  as  it  was  not  of  actual  use  meantime,  and  might 
help  to  attract  the  bears.  Each  took  it  in  turn  to  keep  watch 
on  the  upper  plateau. 

The  day  passed  without  a  sign  of  the  enemy's  existence, 
and  next  morning,  when  they  hurried  eagerly  out  to  examine 
the  snow,  judge  their  astonishment  to  find  it  wholly  un- 
touched ! 

"  Capital !  "  exclaimed  Altamont.  "  The  bears  are  put  off 
the  scent ;  they  have  no  perseverance,  and  have  grown  tired 
waiting  for  us.  They  are  off,  and  a  good  riddance.  Now 
let  us  start  for  a  day's  hunting." 

"Softly,  softly,"  said  the  Doctor;  "I  am  not  so  sure 
they  have  gone.  I  think  we  had  better  wait  one  day  more. 
It  is  evident  the  bears  have  not  been  here  last  night,  at 
least  on  this  side;  but  still " 

"  Well,  let  us  go  right  round  the  plateau,  and  see  how 
things  stand,"  said  the  impatient  Altamont. 

"  All  right,"  said  Clawbonny.    "  Come  along." 

Away  they  went,  but  it  was  impossible  to  scrutinize  care- 
fully a  track  of  two  miles,  and  no  trace  of  the  enemy  was 
discoverable. 

"  Now,  then,  can't  we  go  hunting?  "  said  Altamont. 

"  Wait  till  to-morrow,"  urged  the  Doctor  again. 

His  friend  was  very  unwilling  to  delay,  but  yielded  the 
point  at  last,  and  returned  to  the  fort. 

As  on  the  preceding  night,  each  man  took  his  hour's 
watch  on  the  upper  plateau.  When  it  came  to  Altamont's 
turn,  and  he  had  gone  out  to  relieve  Bell,  Hatteras  called 
his  old  companions  round  him.  The  Doctor  left  his  desk 
and  Johnson  his  cooking,  and  hastened  to  their  captain's 
side,  supposing  he  wanted  to  talk  over  their  perilous  situa- 
tion ;  but  Hatteras  never  gave  it  a  thought. 

"  My  friends,"  he  said,  "  let  us  take  advantage  of  the 
American's  absence  to  speak  of  business.  There  are  things 
which  cannot  concern  him,  and  with  which  I  do  not  choose 
him  to  meddle." 


TRACES    OF    BEARS  61 

Johnson  and  Clawbonny  looked  at  each  other,  wondering 
what  the  captain  was  driving  at. 

"  I  wish,"  he  continued,  "  to  talk  with  you  about  our 
plans  for  the  future." 

"All  right;  talk  away,  while  we  are  alone,"  said  the 
Doctor. 

"  In  a  month,  or  six  weeks  at  the  outside,  the  time  for 
making  distant  excursions  will  come  again.  Have  you 
thought  of  what  we  had  better  undertake  in  summer?  " 

"Have  you,  captain?"  asked  Johnson. 

"  Have  I  ?  I  may  say  that  not  an  hour  of  my  life  passes 
without  revolving  in  my  mind  my  one  cherished  purpose. 
I  suppose  not  a  man  among  you  intends  to  retrace  his 
steps?" 

No  one  replied,  and  Hatteras  went  on  to  say: 

"  For  my  own  part,  even  if  I  must  go  alone,  I  will  push 
on  to  the  North  Pole.  Never  were  men  so  near  it  before, 
for  we  are  not  more  than  360  miles  distant  at  most;  and  I 
will  not  lose  such  an  opportunity  without  making  every 
attempt  to  reach  it,  even  though  it  be  an  impossibility.  What 
are  your  views,  Doctor  ?  " 

"  Your  own,  Hatteras." 

"  And  yours,  Johnson?  " 

"  Like  the  Doctor's." 

"And  yours,  Bell?" 

"  Captain,"  replied  the  carpenter,  "  it  is  true  we  have 
neither  wives  nor  children  waiting  us  in  England,  but,  after 
all,  it  is  one's  country — one's  native  land!  Have  you  no 
thoughts  of  returning  home?  " 

"  We  can  return  after  we  have  discovered  the  Pole  quite 
as  well  as  before,  and  even  better.  Our  difficulties  will  not 
increase,  for  as  we  near  the  Pole  we  get  away  from  the  point 
of  greatest  cold.  We  have  fuel  and  provisions  enough. 
There  is  nothing  to  stop  us,  and  we  should  be  culpable,  in 
my  opinion,  if  we  allowed  ourselves  to  abandon  the  project." 

"  Very  well,  captain ;  I'll  go  along  with  you." 

"That's  right;  I  never  doubted  you,"  said  Hatteras. 
"  We  shall  succeed,  and  England  will  have  all  the  glory." 

"  But  there  is  an  American  among  us ! "  said  Johnson. 

Hatteras  could  not  repress  an  impatient  exclamation. 

"  I  know  it !  "  he  said,  in  a  stern  voice. 

"  We  cannot  leave  him  behind,"  added  the  Doctor. 


62  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

"  No,  we  can't,"  repeated  Hatteras,  almost  mechanically. 

"  And  he  will  be  sure  to  go  too." 

"  Yes,  he  will  go  too;  but  who  will  command!  " 

"  You,  captain." 

"And  if  you  all  obey  my  orders,  will  the  Yankee  re- 
fuse?" 

"  I  shouldn't  think  so ;  but  suppose  he  should,  what  can 
be  done?  " 

"  He  and  I  must  fight  it  out,  then." 

The  three  Englishmen  looked  at  Hatteras,  but  said  noth- 
ing.   Then  the  Doctor  asked  how  they  were  to  go  ? 

"  By  the  coast,  as  far  as  possible,"  was  the  reply. 

"  But  what  if  we  find  open  water,  as  is  likely  enough?  " 

"  Well,  we'll  go  across  it." 

"  But  we  have  no  boat." 

Hatteras  did  not  answer,  and  looked  embarrassed. 

"  Perhaps,"  suggested  Bell,  "  we  might  make  a  ship  out 
of  some  of  the  planks  of  the  Porpoise." 

"  Never !  "  exclaimed  Hatteras,  vehemently. 

"  Never !  "  said  Johnson. 

The  Doctor  shook  his  head.  He  understood  the  feeling 
of  the  captain. 

"  Never !  "  reiterated  Hatteras.  "  A  boat  made  out  of  an 
American  ship  would  be  an  American !  " 

"  But  captain "  began  Johnson. 

The  Doctor  made  a  sign  to  the  old  boatswain  not  to  press 
the  subject  further,  and  resolved  in  his  own  mind  to  reserve 
the  question  for  discussion  at  a  more  opportune  moment. 
He  managed  to  turn  the  conversation  to  other  matters,  till 
it  abruptly  terminated  by  the  entrance  of  Altamont. 

This  ended  the  day,  and  the  night  passed  quietly  without 
the  least  disturbance.    The  bears  had  evidently  disappeared. 


CHAPTER  XII 

IMPRISONED  IN  DOCTOR'S  HOUSE 

The  first  business  next  day  was  to  arrange  for  a  hunt. 
It  was  settled  that  Altamont,  Bell,  and  Hatteras  should  form 
the  party,  while  Clawbonny  should  go  and  explore  as  far 
as  Isle  Johnson,  and  make  some  hydrographic  notes,  and 
Johnson  should  remain  behind  to  keep  house. 


IMPRISONED   IN   DOCTOR'S   HOUSE       63 

The  three  hunters  soon  completed  their  preparations. 
They  armed  themselves  each  with  a  double-barreled  re- 
volver and  a  rifle,  and  took  plenty  of  powder  and  shot 
Each  man  also  carried  in  his  belt  his  indispensable  snow 
knife  and  hatchet,  and  a  small  supply  of  pemmican  in  case 
night  should  surprise  them  before  their  return. 

Thus  equipped,  they  could  go  far,  and  might  count  on  a 
good  supply  of  game. 

At  eight  o'clock  they  started,  accompanied  by  Duk,  who 
frisked  and  gamboled  with  delight.  They  went  up  the  hill 
to  the  east,  across  the  cone,  and  down  into  the  plain  below. 

The  Doctor  next  took  his  departure,  after  agreeing  with 
Johnson  on  a  signal  of  alarm  in  case  of  danger. 

The  old  boatswain  was  left  alone,  but  he  had  plenty  to 
do.  He  began  by  unfastening  the  Greenland  dogs,  and  let- 
ting them  out  for  a  run,  after  their  long,  wearisome  con- 
finement. Then  he  attended  to  divers  housekeeping  matters. 
He  had  to  replenish  the  stock  of  combustibles  and  provisions, 
to  arrange  the  store-houses,  to  mend  several  broken  utensils, 
to  repair  the  rents  in  coverlets,  and  get  new  shoes  ready 
for  summer  excursions.  There  was  no  lack  of  work,  and 
the  old  sailor's  nimble,  clever  fingers  could  do  anything^ 

While  his  hands  were  busy,  his  mind  was  occupied  with 
the  conversation  of  the  preceding  evening.  He  thought  with 
regret  over  the  captain's  obstinacy,  and  yet  he  felt  that  there 
was  something  grand  and  even  heroic  in  his  determination 
that  neither  an  American  nor  an  American  ship  should 
first  touch  the  Pole. 

The  hunters  had  been  gone  about  an  hour  when  Johnson 
suddenly  heard  the  report  of  a  gun. 

"  Capital !  "  he  exclaimed.  "  They  have  found  some- 
thing, and  pretty  quickly  too,  for  me  to  hear  their  guns  so 
distinctly.    The  atmosphere  must  be  very  clear." 

A  second  and  a  third  shot  followed. 

"Bravo!"  again  exclaimed  the  boatswain;  "they  must 
have  fallen  in  luck's  way !  "  . 

But  when  three  more  shots  came  in  rapid  succession,  the 
old  man  turned  pale,  and  a  horrible  thought  crossed  his 
mind  which  made  him  rush  out  and  climb  hastily  to  the 
lop  of  the  cone.  He  shuddered  at  the  sight  which  met  his 
eyes.  The  three  hunters,  followed  by  Duk,  were  tearing 
home  at  full  speed,  followed  by  the  five  huge  bears!    Their 


64  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

six  balls  had  evidently  taken  no  effect,  and  the  terrible 
monsters  were  close  on  their  heels.  Hatteras,  who  brought 
up  the  rear,  could  only  manage  to  keep  off  his  pursuers  by 
flinging  down  one  article  after  another — first  his  cap,  then 
his  hatchet,  and,  finally,  his  gun.  He  knew  that  the  inquisi- 
tive bears  would  stop  and  examine  every  object,  sniffing  all 
round  it,  and  this  gave  him  a  little  time,  otherwise  he  could 
not  have  escaped,  for  these  animals  outstrip  the  fleetest 
horse,  and  one  monster  was  so  near  that  Hatteras  had  to 
brandish  his  knife  vigorously,  to  ward  off  a  tremendous 
blow  of  his  paw. 

At  last,  though  panting  and  out  of  breath,  the  three  men 
reached  Johnson  safely,  and  slid  down  the  rock  with  him 
into  the  snow-house.  The  bears  stopped  short  on  the  upper 
plateau,  and  Hatteras  and  his  companions  lost  no  time  in 
barring  and  barricading  them  out. 

"  Here  we  are  at  last !  "  exclaimed  Hatteras ;  "  we  can 
defend  ourselves  better  now.    It  is  five  against  five." 

"  Four !  "  said  Johnson,  in  a  frightened  voice. 

"How?" 

"  The  Doctor ! "  replied  Johnson,  pointing  to  the  empty 
sitting-room.    "  He  is  in  Isle  Johnson." 

"A  bad  job  for  him,"  said  Bell. 

"  But  we  can't  leave  him  to  his  fate,  in  this  fashion,"  said 
Altamont. 

"  No;  let's  be  off  to  find  him  at  once,"  replied  Hatteras. 
He  opened  the  door,  but  soon  shut  it,  narrowly  escaping 
a  bear's  hug.    "  They  are  there !  "  he  exclaimed. 

"All?  "asked  Bell. 

"  The  whole  pack." 

Altamont  rushed  to  the  windows,  and  began  to  fill  up 
the  deep  embrasure  with  blocks  of  ice,  which  he  broke  off 
the  walls  of  the  house. 

His  companions  followed  his  example  silently.  Not  a 
sound  was  heard  but  the  low,  deep  growl  of  Duk. 

To  tell  the  simple  truth,  however,  it  was  not  their  own 
danger  that  occupied  their  thoughts,  but  their  absent  friend, 
the  Doctor's.  It  was  for  him  they  trembled,  not  for  them- 
selves. Poor  Clawbonny,  so  good  and  devoted  as  he  had 
been  to  every  member  of  the  little  colony!  This  was  the 
first  time  they  had  been  separated  from  him.  Extreme  peril 
and  most  likely  a  frightful  death  awaited  him,  for  he  might 

V.  Ill  Verne 


IMPRISONED   IN   DOCTOR'S   HOUSE       65 

return  unsuspectingly  to  Fort  Providence,  and  find  himself 
in  the  power  of  these  ferocious  animals. 

"  And  yet,"  said  Johnson,  "  unless  I  am  much  mistaken, 
he  must  be  on  guard.  Your  repeated  shots  cannot  but  have 
warned  him.  He  must  surely  be  aware  that  something  un- 
usual has  happened." 

"  But  suppose  he  was  too  far  away  to  hear  them,"  replied 
Altamont,  "or  has  not  understood  the  cause  of  them?  It 
is  ten  chances  to  one  but  he'll  come  quickly  back,  never 
imagining  the  danger.  The  bears  are  screened  from  sight 
by  the  crag  completely." 

"  We  must  get  rid  of  them  before  he  comes,"  said  Hat- 
teras. 

"But  how?  "asked  Bell. 

It  was  difficult  to  reply  to  this,  for  a  sortie  was  out  of 
the  question.  They  had  taken  care  to  barricade  the  entrance 
passage,  but  the  bears  could  easily  find  a  way  in  if  they 
chose.  So  it  was  thought  advisable  to  keep  a  close  watch 
on  their  movements  outside,  by  listening  attentively  in  each 
room,  so  as  to  be  able  to  resist  all  attempts  at  invasion. 
They  could  hear  them  distinctly  prowling  about,  growling 
and  scraping  the  walls  with  their  enormous  paws. 

However,  some  action  must  be  taken  speedily,  for  time 
was  passing.  Altamont  resolved  to  try  a  port-hole  through 
which  he  might  fire  on  his  assailants.  He  had  soon  scooped 
out  a  hole  in  the  wall,  but  his  gun  was  hardly  pushed 
through,  when  it  was  seized  with  irresistible  force,  and 
wrested  from  his  grasp  before  he  could  even  fire. 

"  Confound  it ! "  he  exclaimed,  "  we're  no  match  for 
them." 

And  he  hastened  to  stop  up  the  breach  as  fast  as  pos- 
sible. 

This  state  of  things  had  lasted  upwards  of  an  hour,  and 
there  seemed  no  prospect  of  a  termination.  The  question  of 
a  sortie  began  now  to  be  seriously  discussed.  There  was 
little  chance  of  success,  as  the  bears  could  not  be  attacked 
separately,  but  Hatteras  and  his  companions  had  grown  so 
impatient,  and  it  must  be  confessed  were  also  so  much 
ashamed  of  being  kept  in  prison  by  beasts,  that  they  would 
even  have  dared  the  risk  if  the  captain  had  not  suddenly 
thought  of  a  new  mode  of  defence. 

He  took  Johnson's  furnace-poker,  and  thrust  it  into  the 


66  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

stove,  while  he  made  an  opening  in  the  snow  wall,  or  rather 
a  partial  opening,  for  he  left  a  thin  sheet  of  ice  on  the  outer 
side.  As  soon  as  the  poker  was  red-hot,  he  said  to  his  com- 
rades, who  stood  eagerly  watching  him,  wondering  what 
he  was  going  to  do : 

"  This  red-hot  bar  will  keep  off  the  bears  when  they  try 
to  get  hold  of  it,  and  we  shall  be  able  easily  to  fire  across  it 
without  letting  them  snatch  away  our  guns." 

"  A  good  idea,"  said  Bell,  posting  himself  beside  Alta- 
mont. 

Hatteras  withdrew  the  poker,  and  instantly  plunged  it 
in  the  wall.  The  melting  snow  made  a  loud  hissing  noise, 
and  two  bears  ran  and  made  a  snatch  at  the  glowing  bar; 
but  they  fell  back  with  a  terrible  howl,  and  at  the  same  mo- 
ment four  shots  resounded,  one  after  the  other. 

"  Hit !  "  exclaimed  Altamont. 

"Hit!  "echoed  Bell. 

"  Let  us  repeat  the  dose,"  said  Hatteras,  carefully  stop- 
ping up  the  opening  meantime. 

The  poker  was  again  thrust  into  the  fire,  and  in  afew 
minutes  was  ready  for  Hatteras  to  recommence  operations. 

Altamont  and  Bell  reloaded  their  guns,  and  took  their 
places ;  but  this  time  the  poker  would  not  pass  through. 

"  Confound  the  beasts ! "  exclaimed  the  impetuous  Ameri- 
can. 

"  What's  the  matter?  "  asked  Johnson. 

"What's  the  matter?  Why,  those  plaguey  animals  are 
piling  up  block  after  block,  intending  to  bury  us  alive! " 

"Impossible!" 

"  Look  for  yourself;  the  poker  can't  get  through.  I  de- 
clare it  is  getting  absurd  now." 

It  was  worse  than  absurd,  it  was  alarming.  Things  grew 
worse.  It  was  evident  that  the  bears  meant  to  stifle  their 
prey,  for  the  sagacious  animals  were  heaping  up  huge 
masses,  which  would  make  escape  impossible. 

"  It  is  too  bad,"  said  old  Johnson,  with  a  mortified  look. 
"  One  might  put  up  with  men,  but  bears !  " 

Two  hours  elapsed  without  bringing  any  relief  to  the 
prisoners;  to  go  out  was  impossible,  and  the  thick  walls 
excluded  all  sound.  Altamont  walked  impatiently  up  and 
down,  full  of  exasperation  and  excitement  at  finding  him- 
self worsted  for  once.    Hatteras  could  think  of  nothing  but 


IMPRISONED   IN   DOCTOR'S   HOUSE       67 

the  Doctor,  and  of  the  serious  peril  which  threatened  him. 

"  Oh,  if  Mr.  Clawbonny  were  only  here !  "  said  Johnson. 

"  What  could  he  do  ?  "  asked  Altamont. 

"  Oh,  he'd  manage  to  get  us  out  somehow." 

"  How,  pray  ?  "  said  the  American,  crossly. 

"If  I  knew  that  I  should  not  need  him.  However,  I 
know  what  his  advice  just  now  would  be." 

"What?" 

"  To  take  some  food ;  that  can't  hurt  us.  What  do  you 
say,  Mr.  Altamont?" 

"  Oh,  let's  eat,  by  all  means,  if  that  will  please  you,  though 
we're  in  a  ridiculous,  not  to  say  humiliating  plight." 

"  I'll  bet  you  we'll  find  a  way  out  after  dinner." 

No  one  replied,  but  they  seated  themselves  round  the  table. 
Johnson,  trained  in  Clawbonny's  school,  tried  to  be  brave 
and  unconcerned  about  the  danger,  but  he  could  scarcely 
manage  it.  His  jokes  stuck  in  his  throat.  Moreover,  the 
whole  party  began  to  feel  uncomfortable.  The  atmosphere 
was  getting  dense,  for  every  opening  was  hermetically 
sealed.  The  stoves  would  hardly  draw,  and  it  was  evident 
would  soon  go  out  altogether  for  want  of  oxygen. 

Hatteras  was  the  first  to  see  their  fresh  danger,  and  he 
made  no  attempt  to  hide  it  from  his  companions. 

"If  that  is  the  case,"  said  Altamont,  "  we  must  get  out 
at  all  risks." 

"  Yes,"  replied  Hatteras;  "  but  let  us  wait  till  night.  We 
will  make  a  hole  in  the  roof,  and  let  in  a  provision  of  air, 
and  then  one  of  us  can  fire  out  of  it  on  the  bears." 

"  It  is  the  only  thing  we  can  do,  I  suppose,"  said  Alta- 
mont. 

So  it  was  agreed ;  but  waiting  was  hard  work,  and  Alta- 
mont could  not  refrain  from  giving  vent  to  his  impatience 
by  thundering  maledictions  on  the  bears,  and  abusing  the  ill 
fate  which  had  placed  them  in  such  an  awkward  and  hum- 
bling predicament.  "  It  was  beasts  versus  men,"  he  said, 
"  and  certainly  the  men  cut  a  pretty  figure." 


CHAPTER  XIII 

THE  MINE 

Night  drew  on,  and  the  lamp  in  the  sitting-room  already 
began  to  burn  dim  for  want  of  oxygen.  At  eight  o'clock  the 
final  arrangements  were  completed,  and  all  that  remained  to 
do  was  to  make  an  opening  in  the  roof. 

They  had  been  working  away  at  this  for  some  minutes, 
and  Bell  was  showing  himself  quite  an  adept  at  the  business, 
when  Johnson,  who  had  been  keeping  watch  in  the  sleeping 
room,  came  hurriedly  in  to  his  companions,  pulling  such  a 
long  face  that  the  captain  asked  immediately  what  was  the 
matter. 

"  Nothing  exactly,"  said  the  old  sailor,  "  and  yet " 

"  Come,  out  with  it!  "exclaimed  Altamont. 

"  Hush !  don't  you  hear  a  peculiar  noise  ?  " 

"Where?" 

"  Here,  on  this  side,  on  the  wall  of  the  room." 

Bell  stopped  working,  and  listened  attentively  like  the 
rest.  Johnson  was  right;  a  noise  there  certainly  was  on 
the  side  wall,  as  if  someone  were  cutting  the  ice. 

"Don't  you  hear  it?"  repeated  Johnson. 

"  Hear  it  ?    Yes,  plain  enough,"  replied  Altamont. 

"  Is  it  the  bears  ?  "  asked  Bell. 

"  Most  assuredly," 

"  Well,  they  have  changed  their  tactics,"  said  old  John- 
son, "  and  given  up  the  idea  of  suffocating  us." 

"  Or  maybe  they  suppose  we  are  suffocated  by  now," 
suggested  the  American,  getting  furious  at  his  invisible 
enemies. 

"  They  are  going  to  attack  us,"  said  Bell. 

"  Well,  what  of  it  ?  "  returned  Hatteras. 

"  We  shall  have  a  hand-to-hand  struggle,  that's  all." 

"And  so  much  the  better,"  added  Altamont;  "that's  far 
more  to  my  taste;  I  have  had  enough  of  invisible  foes — let 
me  see  my  antagonist,  and  then  I  can  fight  him." 

"  Ay,"  said  Johnson ;  "  but  not  with  guns.  They  would 
be  useless  here." 

"With  knife  and  hatchet  then,"  returned  the  American. 

The  noise  increased,  and  it  was  evident  that  the  point  of 
attack  was  the  angle  of  the  wall  formed  by  its  juction  with 
the  cliff. 

"  They  are  hardly  six  feet  off  now,"  said  the  boatswain. 

68 


THE  MINE  69 

"  Right,  Johnson !  "  replied  Altamont ;  "  but  we  have  time 
enough  to  be  ready  for  them." 

And  seizing  a  hatchet,  he  placed  himself  in  fighting  atti- 
tude, planting  his  right  foot  firmly  forward  and  throwing 
himself  back. 

Hatteras  and  the  others  followed  his  example,  and  John- 
son took  care  to  load  a  gun  in  case  of  necessity. 

Every  minute  the  sound  came  nearer,  till  at  last  only  a 
thin  coating  separated  them  from  their  assailants. 

Presently  this  gave  way  with  a  loud  crack,  and  a  huge 
dark  mass  rolled  over  into  the  room. 

Altamont  had  already  swung  his  hatchet  to  strike,  when 
he  was  arrested  by  a  well-known  voice,  exclaiming : 

"  For  Heaven's  sake,  stop !  " 

"The  Doctor!  the  Doctor!"  cried  Johnson. 

And  the  Doctor  it  actually  was  who  had  tumbled  in 
among  them  in  such  undignified  fashion. 

"  How  do  ye  do,  good  friends?"  he  said,  picking  himself 
smartly  up. 

His  companions  stood  stupefied  for  a  moment,  but  joy 
soon  loosened  their  tongues,  and  each  rushed  eagerly  for- 
ward to  welcome  his  old  comrade  with  amoving  embrace. 
Hatteras  was  for  once  fairly  overcome  with  emotion,  and 
positively  hugged  him  like  a  child. 

"  And  is  it  really  you,  Mr.  Clawbonny  ?  "  said  Johnson. 

"  Myself  and  nobody  else,  my  old  fellow.  I  assure  you 
I  have  been  far  more  uneasy  about  you  than  you  could  have 
been  about  me." 

"  But  how  did  you  know  we  had  been  attacked  by  a  troop 
of  bears?  "  asked  Altamont.  "  What  we  were  most  afraid 
of  was  that  you  would  quickly  come  back  to  Fort  Provi- 
dence, never  dreaming  of  danger." 

"  Oh,  I  saw  it  all.  Your  repeated  shots  gave  me  the 
alarm.  When  you  commenced  firing  I  was  beside  the  wreck 
of  the  Porpoise,  but  I  climbed  up  a  hummock,  and  dis- 
covered five  bears  close  on  your  heels.  Oh,  how  anxious  I 
was  for  you !  But  when  I  saw  you  disappear  down  the  cliff, 
while  the  bears  stood  hesitating  on  the  edge,  as  if  uncertain 
what  to  do,  I  felt  sure  that  you  had  managed  to  get  safely 
inside  the  house  and  barricade  it.  I  crept  cautiously  nearer, 
sometimes  going  on  all-fours,  sometimes  slipping  between 
great  blocks  of  ice,  till  I  came  at  last  quite  close  to  our  fort, 


70  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

and  then  I  found  the  bears  working  away  like  beavers. 
They  were  prowling  about  the  snow,  and  dragging  enor- 
mous blocks  of  ice  towards  the  house,  piling  them  up  like  a 
wall,  evidently  intending  to  bury  you  alive.  It  is  a  lucky 
thing  they  did  not  take  it  into  their  heads  to  dash  down 
the  blocks  from  the  summit  of  the  cone,  for  you  must  have 
been  crushed  inevitably." 

"  But  what  danger  you  were  in,  Mr.  Clawbonny,"  said 
Bell.  "  Any  moment  they  might  have  turned  round  and  at- 
tacked you." 

"  They  never  thought  of  it,  even.  Johnson's  Greenland 
dogs  came  in  sight  several  times,  but  they  did  not  take  the 
trouble  to  go  after  them.  No,  they  imagined  themselves 
sure  of  a  more  savory  supper !  " 

"  Thanks  for  the  compliment !  "  said  Altamont,  laughing. 

"  Oh,  there  is  nothing  to  be  proud  of.  When  I  saw  what 
the  bears  were  up  to,  I  determined  to  get  back  to  you  by 
some  means  or  other.  I  waited  till  night,  but  as  soon  as 
it  got  dark  I  glided  noiselessly  along  towards  the  powder- 
magazine.  I  had  my  reasons  for  choosing  that  point  from 
which  to  work  my  way  hither,  and  I  speedily  commenced 
operations  with  my  snow-knife.  A  famous  tool  it  is.  For 
three  mortal  hours  I  have  been  hacking  and  heaving  away, 
but  here  I  am  at  last,  tired  enough  and  starving,  but  still 
safe  here." 

"  To  share  our  fate !  "  said  Altamont 

"  No,  to  save  you  all ;  but,  for  any  sake,  give  me  a  biscuit 
and  a  bit  of  meat,  for  I  feel  sinking  for  want  of  food." 

A  substantial  meal  was  soon  before  him,  but  the  vivacious 
little  man  could  talk  all  the  while  he  was  eating,  and  was 
quite  ready  to  answer  any  questions. 

"  Did  you  say  to  save  us?"  asked  Bell. 

"  Most  assuredly !  "  was  the  reply. 

"  Well,  certainly,  if  you  found  your  way  in,  we  can  find 
our  way  out  by  the  same  road." 

"  A  likely  story !  And  leave  the  field  clear  for  the  whole 
pack  to  come  in  and  find  out  our  stores.  Pretty  havoc  they 
would  make ! " 

"  No,  we  must  stay  here,"  said  Hatteras. 

"  Of  course  we  must,"  replied  Clawbonny ;  "  but  we'll  get 
rid  of  the  bears  for  all  that." 

"  I  told  you  so,"  said  Johnson,  rubbing  his  hands.     "  I 


THE  MINE  71 

knew  that  nothing  was  hopeless  if  Mr.  Clawbonny  was  here ; 
he  has  always  some  expedient  in  his  wise  head." 

"  My  poor  head  is  very  empty,  I  fear,  but  by  dint  of  rum- 
maging perhaps  I " 

"  Doctor,"  interrupted  Altamont,  "  I  suppose  there  is  no 
fear  of  the  bears  getting  in  by  the  passage  you  have  made?  " 

"  No,  I  took  care  to  stop  up  the  opening  thoroughly,  and 
now  we  can  reach  the  powder-magazine  without  letting 
them  see  us." 

"All  right;  and  now  will  you  let  us  have  your  plan  of 
getting  rid  of  these  comical  assailants?  " 

"  My  plan  is  quite  simple,  and  part  of  the  work  is  done 
already." 

"  What  do  you  mean? " 

"  You  shall  see.  But  I  am  forgetting  that  I  brought  a 
companion  with  me." 

"  What  do  you  say  ?  "  said  Johnson. 

"  I  have  a  companion  to  introduce  to  you,"  replied  the 
Doctor,  going  out  again  into  the  passage,  and  bringing  back 
a  dead  fox,  newly  killed. 

"  I  shot  it  this  morning,"  he  continued,  "  and  never  did 
fox  come  more  opportunely." 

"  What  on  earth  do  you  mean?  "  asked  Altamont. 

"  I  mean  to  blow  up  the  bears  en  masse  with  100  lbs.  of 
powder." 

"  But  where  is  the  powder?  "  exclaimed  his  friends. 

"  In  the  magazine.  This  passage  will  lead  to  it.  I  made 
it  purposely." 

"  And  where  is  the  mine  to  be?  "  inquired  Altamont. 

"  At  the  farthest  point  from  the  house  and  stores." 

"  And  how  will  you  manage  to  entice  the  bears  there,  all 
to  one  spot  ?  " 

"  I'll  undertake  that  business ;  but  we  have  talked  enough, 
let  us  set  to  work.  We  have  a  hundred  feet  more  to  add 
to  our  passage  to-night,  and  that  is  no  easy  matter ;  but  as 
there  are  five  of  us,  we  can  take  turns  at  it.  Bell  will  begin, 
and  we  will  lie  down  and  sleep  meantime." 

"  Well,  really,"  said  Johnson,  "  the  more  I  think  of  it, 
the  more  feasible  seems  the  Doctor's  plan." 

"  It  is  a  sure  one,  anyway,"  said  Clawbonny. 

"  So  sure  that  I  can  feel  the  bears'  fur  already  on  my 
shoulder.    Well,  come,  let's  begin  then." 


72  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

Away  he  went  into  the  gloomy  passage,  followed  by  Bell, 
and  in  a  few  moments  they  had  reached  the  powder-maga- 
zine, and  stood  among  the  well-arranged  barrels.  The  Doc- 
tor pointed  out  to  his  companion  the  exact  spot  where  he 
began  excavating,  and  then  left  him  to  his  task,  at  which  he 
labored  diligently  for  about  an  hour,  when  Altamont  came 
to  relieve  him.  All  the  snow  he  had  dug  out  was  taken  to 
the  kitchen  and  melted,  to  prevent  its  taking  up  room. 

The  captain  succeeded  Altamont,  and  was  followed  by 
Johnson.  In  ten  hours — that  is  to  say,  about  eight  in  the 
morning — the  gallery  was  entirely  open. 

With  the  first  streak  of  day,  the  Doctor  was  up  to  recon- 
noiter  the  position  of  the  enemy.  The  patient  animals  were 
still  occupying  their  old  position,  prowling  up  and  down  and 
growling.  The  house  had  already  almost  disappeared  be- 
neath the  piled-up  blocks  of  ice;  but  even  while  he  gazed  a 
council  of  war  seemed  being  held,  which  evidently  resulted 
in  the  determination  to  alter  the  plan  of  action,  for  sud- 
denly all  the  five  bears  began  vigorously  to  pull  down  these 
same  heaped-up  blocks. 

"  What  are  they  about  ?  "  asked  Hatteras. 

"  Well,  they  look  to  me  to  be  bent  on  demolishing  their 
own  work,  and  getting  right  down  to  us  as  fast  as  possible; 
but  wait  a  bit,  my  gentlemen,  we'll  demolish  you  first. 
However,  we  have  not  a  minute  to  lose." 

Hastening  away  to  the  mine,  he  had  the  chamber  where 
the  powder  was  to  be  lodged  enlarged  the  whole  breadth  and 
height  of  the  sloping  rock  against  which  the  wall  leaned, 
till  the  upper  part  was  about  a  foot  thick,  and  had  to  be 
propped  up  to  prevent  its  falling  in.  A  strong  stake  was 
fixed  firmly  on  the  granite  foundation,  on  the  top  of  which 
the  dead  fox  was  fastened.  A  rope  was  attached  to  the 
lower  part  of  the  stake,  sufficiently  long  to  reach  the  powder 
stores. 

"  This  is  the  bait,"  he  said,  pointing  to  the  dead  fox,  "  and 
here  is  the  mine,"  he  added,  rolling  in  a  keg  of  powder  con- 
taining about  ioo  lbs. 

"  But,  Doctor,"  said  Hatteras,  "  won't  that  blow  us  up 
too,  as  well  as  the  bears  ?  " 

"  No,  we  shall  be  too  far  from  the  scene  of  explosion. 
Besides,  our  house  is  solid,  and  we  can  soon  repair  the  walls, 
even  if  they  should  get  a  bit  shaken." 


THE   MINE  73 

"  And  how  do  you  propose  to  manage  ?  "  asked  Altamont. 

"  See !  By  hauling  in  this  rope  we  lower  the  post  which 
props  up  the  roof,  and  make  it  give  way,  and  bring  up 
the  dead  fox  to  light,  and  I  think  you  will  agree  with  me 
that  the  bears  are  so  famished  with  their  long  fasting,  that 
they  won't  lose  much  time  in  rushing  towards  their  unex- 
pected meal.  Well,  just  at  that  very  moment,  I  shall  set 
fire  to  the  mine,  and  blow  tip  both  the  guests  and  the  meal." 

"  Capital !  Capital !  "  shouted  Johnson,  who  had  been  lis- 
tening with  intense  interest. 

Hatteras  said  nothing,  for  he  had  such  absolute  confi- 
dence in  his  friend  that  he  wanted  no  further  explanation. 
But  Altamont  must  know  the  why  and  wherefore  of  every- 
thing." 

"  But  Doctor,"  he  said,  "  can  you  reckon  on  your  match 
so  exactly  that  you  can  be  quite  sure  it  will  fire  the  mine  at 
the  right  moment  ?  " 

"I  don't  need  to  reckon  at  all;  that's  a  difficulty  easily 
got  over." 

"  Then  you  have  a  match  a  hundred  feet  long?  " 

"  No." 

"  You  are  simply  going  to  lay  a  train  of  powder." 

"  No,  that  might  miss  fire." 

"  Well,  there  is  no  way  then  but  for  one  of  us  to  devote 
his  life  to  the  others,  and  go  and  light  the  powder  him- 
self." 

"  I'm  ready,"  said  Johnson,  eagerly,  "  ready  and  willing." 

"Quite  useless,  my  brave  fellow,"  replied  the  Doctor, 
holding  out  his  hand.  "  All  our  lives  are  precious,  and  they 
will  be  all  spared,  thank  God !  " 

"  Well,  I  give  it  up !  "  said  the  American.  "  I'll  make  no 
more  guesses." 

"I  should  like  to  know  what  is  the  good  of  learning 
physics,"  said  the  Doctor,  smiling,  "  if  they  can't  help  a  man 
at  a  pinch  like  this.  Haven't  we  an  electric  battery,  and 
long  enough  lines  attached  to  it  to  serve  our  purpose?  We 
can  fire  our  mine  whenever  we  please,  in  an  instant,  and 
without  the  slightest  danger." 

"  Hurrah ! "  exclaimed  Johnson. 

"  Hurrah!  "  echoed  the  others,  without  heeding  whether 
the  enemy  heard  them  or  not. 

The  Doctor's  idea  was  immediately  carried  out,  and  the 


74  THE  DESERT  OF  ICE; 

connecting  lines  uncoiled  and  laid  down  from  the  house  to 
the  chamber  of  the  mine,  one  end  of  each  remaining  at- 
tached to  the  electric  pile,  and  the  other  inserted  into  the 
keg  of  powder. 

By  nine  o'clock  everything  was  ready.  It  was  high  time, 
for  the  bears  were  furiously  engaged  in  the  work  of  demoli- 
tion. Johnson  was  stationed  in  the  powder-magazine,  in 
charge  of  the  cord  which  held  the  bait. 

"  Now,"  said  Clawbonny  to  his  companions,  "  load  your 
guns,  in  case  our  assailants  are  not  killed.  Stand  beside 
Johnson,  and  the  moment  the  explosion  is  over  rush  out." 

"  All  right,"  said  Altamont. 

"And  now  we  have  done  all  we  can  to  help  ourselves. 
So  may  Heaven  help  us !  " 

Hatteras,  Altamont,  and  Bell  repaired  to  the  powder- 
magazine,  while  the  Doctor  remained  alone  beside  the  pile. 
Soon  he  heard  Johnson's  voice  in  the  distance  calling  out 
"Ready!" 

"  All  right !  "  was  the  reply. 

Johnson  pulled  his  rope  vigorously,  and  then  rushed  to 
'the  loophole  to  see  the  effect.  The  thin  shell  of  ice  had 
given  way,  and  the  body  of  the  fox  lay  among  the  ruins. 
The  bears  were  somewhat  scared  at  first,  but  the  next  min- 
ute had  eagerly  rushed  to  seize  the  booty. 

"  Fire ! "  called  out  Johnson,  and  at  once  the  electric 
spark  was  sent  along  the  lines  right  into  the  keg  of  powder. 
A  formidable  explosion  ensued ;  the  house  was  shaken  as  if 
by  an  earthquake,  and  the  walls  cracked  asunder.  Hatteras, 
Altamont,  and  Bell  hurried  out  with  the  guns,  but  they 
might  spare  their  shot,  for  four  of  the  bears  lay  dead,  and 
the  fifth,  half  roasted,  though  alive,  was  scampering  away 
in  terror,  as  fast  as  his  legs  could  carry  him. 

"  Hurrah !  Three  cheers  for  Clawbonny,"  they  shouted, 
and  overwhelmed  the  Doctor  with  plaudits  and  thanks. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

AN   ARCTIC   SPRING 

The  prisoners  were  free,  and  their  joy  found  vent  in 
the  noisiest  demonstrations.  They  employed  the  rest  of  the 
day  in  repairing  the  house,  which  had  suffered  greatly  by 


AN   ARCTIC   SPRING  75 

the  explosion.  They  cleared  away  the  blocks  piled  up  by 
the  animals,  and  filled  up  the  rents  in  the  walls,  working 
with  might  and  main,  enlivened  by  the  many  songs  of  old 
Johnson. 

Next  morning  there  was  a  singular  rise  in  the  tempera- 
ture, the  thermometer  going  up  to  150  above  zero.  This 
comparative  heat  lasted  several  days.  In  sheltered  spots  the 
glass  rose  as  high  as  310,  and  symptoms  of  a  thaw  appeared. 
The  ice  began  to  crack  here  and  there,  and  jets  of  salt 
water  were  thrown  up,  like  fountains  in  an  English  park. 
A  few  days  later,  the  rain  fell  in  torrents. 

Thick  vapor  rose  from  the  snow,  giving  promise  of  the 
speedy  disappearance  of  these  immense  masses.  The  sun's 
pale  disc  became  deeper  in  color,  and  remained  longer  above 
the  horizon.  The  night  was  scarcely  longer  than  three 
hours.  Other  tokens  of  spring's  approach  were  manifest,  of 
equal  significance;  the  birds  were  returning  in  flocks,  and 
the  air  resounded  with  their  deafening  cries.  Hares  were 
seen  on  the  shores  of  the  bay,  and  mice  in  such  abundance 
that  their  burrows  completely  honeycombed  the  ground. 

The  Doctor  drew  the  attention  of  his  companions  to  the 
fact  that  almost  all  these  animals  were  beginning  to  lose 
their  white  winter  dress,  and  would  soon  put  on  summer 
attire;  while  nature  was  already  providing  mosses,  and 
poppies,  and  saxifragas,  and  short  grass  for  their  suste- 
nance.    A  new  world  lay  beneath  that  melting  snow. 

But  with  these  inoffensive  animals  came  back  their  natural 
enemies.  Foxes  and  wolves  arrived  in  search  of  their  prey, 
and  dismal  howls  broke  the  silence  of  the  short  night. 

Arctic  wolves  closely  resemble  dogs,  and  their  barking 
would  deceive  the  most  practiced  ears ;  even  the  canine  race 
themselves  have  been  deceived  by  it.  Indeed,  it  seems  as 
if  the  wily  animals  employed  this  ruse  to  attract  the  dogs, 
and  make  them  their  prey.  Several  navigators  have  men- 
tioned the  fact,  and  the  Doctor's  own  experience  confirmed 
it.  Johnson  took  care  not  to  let  his  Greenlanders  Joose;  ot 
Duk  there  was  little  fear— nothing  could  take  him  in. 

For  about  a  fortnight  hunting  was  the  principal  occupa- 
tion. There  was  an  abundant  supply  of  fresh  meat  to  be 
had.  They  shot  partridges,  ptarmigans,  and  snow  ortolans, 
which  are  delicious  eating.  The  hunters  never  went  far 
from  Fort  Providence,  for  game  was  so  plentiful  that  it 


76  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

seemed  waiting  their  guns,  and  the  whole  bay  presented  an 
animated  appearance. 

The  thaw,  meanwhile,  was  making  rapid  progress.  The 
thermometer  stood  steadily  at  320  above  zero,  and  the 
water  ran  round  the  mountain-sides  in  cataracts,  and  dashed 
in  torrents  through  the  ravines. 

The  Doctor  lost  no  time  in  clearing  about  an  acre  of 
ground,  in  which  he  sowed  the  seeds  of  anti-scorbutic  plants. 
He  just  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  tiny  little  green  leaves 
begin  to  sprout,  when  the  cold  returned  in  full  force. 

In  a  single  night  the  thermometer  lost  nearly  400;  it 
went  down  to  8°  below  zero.  Everything  was  frozen ;  birds, 
quadrupeds,  amphibia  disappeared  as  if  by  magic;  seal-holes 
re-closed,  and  the  ice  once  more  became  hard  as  granite. 

The  change  was  most  striking;  it  occurred  on  the  18th  of 
May,  during  the  night.  The  Doctor  was  rather  disap- 
pointed at  having  all  his  work  to  do  again,  but  Hatteras  bore 
the  grievance  most  unphilosophically,  as  it  interfered  with 
all  his  plans  of  speedy  departure. 

"  Do  you  think  we  shall  have  a  long  spell  of  this  weather, 
Mr.  Clawbonny?"  asked  Johnson. 

"  No,  my  friend,  I  don't;  it  is  a  last  blow  from  the  cold. 
You  see  these  are  his  dominions,  and  he  won't  be  driven  out 
without  making  some  resistance." 

"  He  can  defend  himself  pretty  well,"  said  Bell,  rubbing 
his  face. 

"  Yes;  but  I  ought  to  have  waited,  and  not  have  wasted 
my  seed  like  an  ignoramus ;  and  all  the  more  as  I  could,  if 
necessary,  have  made  them  sprout  by  the  kitchen  stoves." 

"  But  do  you  mean  to  say,"  asked  Altamont,  "  that  you 
might  have  anticipated  the  sudden  change." 

"  Of  course,  and  without  being  a  wizard.  I  ought  to  have 
put  my  seed  under  the  protection  of  Saint  Paucratius  and 
the  two  other  saints,  whose  fete  days  fall  this  month." 

"Absurd!  Pray  tell  me  what  have  they  to  do  with  it? 
What  influence  can  they  possibly  have  on  the  temperature  ?  " 

"An  immense  one,  if  we  are  to  believe  horticulturists, 
who  call  them  the  patron  saints  of  the  frost." 

"  And  for  what  reason  ?  " 

"Because  generally  there  is  a  periodical  frost  in  the 
month  of  May,  and  it  is  coldest  from  the  nth  to  the  13th. 
That  is  the  fact?" 


AN  ARCTIC   SPRING  77 

"  And  how  is  it  explained?  " 

"  In  two  ways.  Some  say  that  a  larger  number  of  aste- 
roids come  between  the  earth  and  the  sun  at  this  time  of 
year,  and  others  that  the  mere  melting  of  the  snow  neces- 
sarily absorbs  a  large  amount  of  heat,  and  accounts  for  the 
low  temperature.  Both  theories  are  plausible  enough,  but 
the  fact  remains  whichever  we  accept,  and  I  ought  to  have 
remembered  it." 

The  Doctor  was  right,  for  the  cold  lasted  till  the  end 
of  the  month,  and  put  an  end  to  all  their  hunting  expedi- 
tions. The  old  monotonous  life  in-doors  recommenced, 
and  was  unmarked  by  any  incident  except  a  serious  illness 
which  suddenly  attacked  Bell.  This  was  violent  quinsy, 
but,  under  the  Doctor's  skillful  treatment,  it  was  soon  cured. 
Ice  was  the  only  remedy  he  employed,  administered  in 
small  pieces,  and  in  twenty-four  hours  Bell  was  himself 
again. 

During  this  compulsory  leisure,  Clawbonny  determined 
to  have  a  talk  with  the  captain  on  an  important  subject — 
the  building  of  a  sloop  out  of  the  planks  of  the  Porpoise. 

The  Doctor  hardly  knew  how  to  begin,  as  Hatteras  had 
declared  so  vehemently  that  he  would  never  consent  to  use 
a  morsel  of  American  wood;  yet  it  was  high  time  he  were 
brought  to  reason,  as  June  was  at  hand,  the  only  season  for 
distant  expeditions,  and  they  could  not  start  without  a  ship. 

He  thought  over  it  a  long  while,  and  at  last  drew  the 
captain  aside,  and  said,  in  the  kindest,  gentlest  way : 

"Hatteras,  do  you  believe  I'm  your  friend?" 

"Most  certainly  I  do,"  replied  the  captain,  earnestly; 
"  my  best,  indeed,  my  only  friend." 

"  And  if  I  give  you  a  piece  of  advice  without  your  ask- 
ing, will  you  consider  my  motive  is  perfectly  disinterested?  " 

"  Yes,  for  I  know  you  have  never  been  actuated  by  self- 
interest.    But  what  are  you  driving  at?  " 

"  Wait,  Hatteras ;  I  have  one  thing  more  to  ask.  Do  you 
look  on  me  as  a  true-hearted  Englishman  like  yourself, 
anxious  for  his  country's  glory?  " 

Hatteras  looked  surprised,  but  simply  said: 

"  I  do." 

"  You  desire  to  reach  the  North  Pole,"  the  Doctor  went 
on;  "and  I  understand  and  share  your  ambition;  but  to 
achieve  your  object  you  must  employ  the  right  means.' 


78  THE   DESERT   OF  ICE 

"  Well,  and  have  I  not  sacrificed  everything  for  it?  " 

"  No,  Hatteras,  you  have  not  sacrificed  your  personal  an- 
tipathies. Even  at  this  very  moment  I  know  you  are  in  the 
mood  to  refuse  the  indispensable  conditions  of  reaching  the 
Pole." 

"Ah!  it  is  the  boat  you  want  to  talk  about,  and  that 
man " 

"  Hatteras,  let  us  discuss  the  question  calmly,  and  exam- 
ine the  case  on  all  sides.  The  coast  on  which  we  find  our- 
selves at  present  may  terminate  abruptly;  we  have  no  proof 
that  it  stretches  right  away  to  the  Pole;  indeed,  if  your 
present  information  prove  correct,  we  ought  to  come  to  an 
open  sea  during  the  summer  months.  Well,  supposing  we 
reach  this  Arctic  Ocean  and  find  it  free  from  ice  and  easy 
to  navigate,  what  shall  we  do  if  we  have  no  ship?" 

Hatteras  made  no  reply. 

"  Tell  me,  now,  would  you  like  to  find  yourself  only  a 
few  miles  from  the  Pole  and  not  be  able  to  get  to  it?  " 

Hatteras  still  said  nothing,  but  buried  his  head  in  his 
hands. 

"  Besides,"  continued  the  Doctor,  "  look  at  the  question  in 
its  moral  aspect.  Here  is  an  Englishman  who  sacrifices  his 
fortune,  and  even  his  life  to  win  fresh  glory  for  his  country, 
but  because  the  boat  which  bears  him  across  an  unknown 
ocean,  or  touches  the  new  shore,  happens  to  be  made  of 
the  planks  of  an  American  vessel — a  castaway  wreck  of  no 
use  to  anyone — will  that  lessen  the  honor  of  the  discovery? 
If  you  yourself  had  found  the  hull  of  some  wrecked  vessel 
lying  deserted  on  the  shore,  would  you  have  hesitated  to 
make  use  of  it;  and  must  not  a  sloop  built  by  four  English- 
men and  manned  by  four  Englishmen  be  English  from  keel 
to  gunwale  ?  " 

Hatteras  was  still  silent. 

"  No,"  continued  Clawbonny ;  "  the  real  truth  is,  it  is  not 
the  sloop  you  care  about :  it  is  the  man." 

"  Yes,  Doctor,  yes,"  replied  the  captain.  "  It  is  this 
American  I  detest;  I  hate  him  with  a  thorough  English 
hatred.    Fate  has  thrown  him  in  my  path." 

"  To  save  you !  " 

"  To  ruin  me.  He  seems  to  defy  me,  and  speaks  as  if 
he  were  lord  and  master.  He  thinks  he  has  my  destiny  in 
his  hands,  and  knows  all  my  projects.    Didn't  we  see  the 


AN   ARCTIC   SPRING  79 

man  in  his  true  colors  when  we  were  giving  names  to  the 
different  coasts?  Has  he  ever  avowed  his  object  in  coming 
so  far  north  ?  You  will  never  get  out  of  my  head  that  this 
man  is  not  the  leader  of  some  expedition  sent  out  by  the 
American  Government." 

"  Well,  Hatteras,  suppose  it  is  so,  does  it  follow  that  this 
expedition  is  to  search  for  the  North  Pole?  May  it  not 
be  to  find  the  Northwest  Passage  ?  But  anyway,  Altamont 
is  in  complete  ignorance  of  our  object,  for  neither  Johnson, 
nor  Bell,  nor  myself,  have  ever  breathed  a  word  to  him 
about  it,  and  I  am  sure  you  have  not." 

"  Well,  let  him  always  remain  so." 

"  He  must  be  told  in  the  end,  for  we  can't  leave  him  here 
alone." 

"  Why  not?    Can't  he  stay  here  in  Fort  Providence?  " 

"  He  would  never  consent  to  that,  Hatteras ;  and,  more- 
over, to  leave  a  man  in  that  way,  and  not  know  whether  we 
might  find  him  safe  when  we  came  back,  would  be  worse 
than  imprudent :  it  would  be  inhuman.  Altamont  will  come 
with  us ;  he  must  come.  But  we  need  not  disclose  our  pro- 
jects; let  us  tell  him  nothing,  but  simply  build  a  sloop  for 
the  ostensible  purpose  of  making  a  survey  of  the  coast." 

Hatteras  could  not  bring  himself  to  consent,  but  said : 

"  Suppose  the  man  wont  allow  his  ship  to  be  cut  up?  " 

"  In  that  case,  you  must  take  the  law  in  your  own  hands, 
and  build  a  vessel  in  spite  of  him." 

"  I  wish  to  goodness  he  would  refuse,  then !  " 

"  He  must  be  asked  before  he  can  refuse.  I'll  undertake 
the  asking,"  said  Clawbonny. 

He  kept  his  word,  for  that  very  same  night,  at  supper,  he 
managed  to  turn  the  conversation  towards  the  subject  of 
making  excursions  during  summer  for  hydrographical  pur- 
poses. 

"  You  will  join  us,  I  suppose,  Altamont,"  he  said. 

"  Of  course,"  replied  the  American.  "  We  must  know 
how  far  New  America  extends." 

Hatteras  looked  fixedly  at  his  rival,  but  said  nothing. 

"  And  for  that  purpose,"  continued  Altamont,  "  we  had 
better  build  a  little  ship  out  of  the  remains  of  the  Porpoise. 
It  is  the  best  possible  use  we  can  make  of  her. 

"  You  hear,  Bell,"  said  the  Doctor,  eagerly.  "  We'll  all 
set  to  work  to-morrow  morning." 


CHAPTER  XV 

THE   NORTHWEST   PASSAGE 

Next  morning  Altamont,  Bell,  and  the  Doctor  repaired 
to  the  Porpoise.  There  was  no  lack  of  wood,  for,  shattered 
as  the  old  "three-master"  had  been  by  the  icebergs,  she 
could  still  supply  the  principals  parts  of  a  new  ship,  and 
the  carpenter  began  his  task  immediately. 

In  the  end  of  May  the  temperature  again  rose,  and  spring 
returned  for  good  and  all.  Rain  fell  copiously,  and  before 
long  the  melting  snow  was  running  down  every  little  slope 
in  falls  and  cascades. 

Hatteras  could  not  contain  his  delight  at  these  signs  of  a 
general  thaw  among  the  ice-fields,  for  an  open  sea  would 
bring  him  liberty.  At  last  he  might  hope  to  ascertain  for 
himself  whether  his  predecessors  were  correct  in  their  as- 
sertions about  a  polar  basin. 

This  was  a  frequent  topic  of  thought  and  conversation 
with  him,  and  one  evening  when  he  was  going  over  all  the 
old  familiar  arguments  in  support  of  his  theory,  Altamont 
took  up  the  subject,  and  declared  his  opinion  that  the  polar 
basin  extended  west  as  well  as  east.  But  it  was  impossible 
for  the  American  and  Englishman  to  talk  long  about  any- 
thing without  coming  to  words,  so  intensely  national  were 
both.  Dr.  Kane  was  the  first  bone  of  contention  on  this 
occasion,  for  the  jealous  Englishman  was  unwilling  to  grant 
his  rival  the  glory  of  being  a  discoverer,  alleging  his  belief 
that  though  the  brave  adventurer  had  gone  far  north,  it  was 
by  mere  chance  he  had  made  a  discovery. 

"  Chance !  interrupted  Altamont,  hotly.  "  Do  you  mean 
to  assert  that  it  is  not  to  Kane's  energy  and  science  that  we 
owe  his  great  discovery?  " 

"  I  mean  to  say  that  Dr.  Kane's  name  is  not  worth  men- 
tioning in  a  country  made  illustrious  by  such  names  as 
Parry,  and  Franklin,  and  Ross,  and  Belcher,  and  Penny;  in 
a  country  where  the  seas  opened  the  Northwest  Passage  to 
an  Englishman — McClure !  " 

"  McClure !  "  exclaimed  the  American.  "  Well,  if  ever 
chance  favored  anyone  it  was  that  McClure.  Do  you  pre- 
tend to  deny  it?  " 

"  I  do,"  said  Hatteras,  becoming  quite  excited.    "  It  was 
his  courage  and  perseverance  in  remaining  four  whole  win- 
ters among  the  ice." 
V.  Ill  Verne  gQ 


THE   NORTHWEST   PASSAGE  81 

"I  believe  that,  don't  I?"  said  Altamont,  sneeringly. 
"  He  was  caught  among  the  bergs  and  could  not  get  away ; 
but  didn't  he  after  all  abandon  his  ship,  the  Investigator,  and 
try  to  get  back  home?  Besides,  putting  the  man  aside,  what 
is  the  value  of  his  discovery?  I  maintain  that  the  North- 
west Passage  is  still  undiscovered,  for  not  a  single  ship  to 
this  day  has  ever  sailed  from  Behring's  Straits  to  Baffin's 
Bay!" 

The  fact  was  indisputable,  but  Hatteras  started  to  his 
feet,  and  said : 

"  I  will  not  permit  the  honor  of  an  English  captain  to 
be  attacked  in  my  presence  any  longer !  " 

"  You  will  not  permit !  "  echoed  Altamont,  also  springing 
erect.  "  But  these  are  facts,  and  it  is  out  of  your  power 
to  destroy  them !  " 

"  Sir ! '  shouted  Hatteras,  pale  with  rage. 

"My  friends!"  interposed  the  Doctor;  "pray  be  calm. 
This  is  a  scientific  point  that  we  are  discussing." 

But  Hatteras  was  deaf  to  reason  now,  and  said  angrily : 

"  I'll  tell  you  the  facts,  sir." 

"  And  I'll  tell  you,"  retorted  the  irate  American. 

"  Gentlemen,"  said  Clawbonny,  in  a  firm  tone,  "  allow  me 
to  speak,  for  I  know  the  facts  of  the  case  as  well  as  and  per- 
haps better  than  you,  and  I  can  state  them  impartially." 

"  Yes,  yes !  "  cried  Bell  and  Johnson,  who  had  been  anx- 
iously watching  the  strife. 

"  Well,  go  on,"  said  Altamont,  finding  himself  in  the  mi- 
nority, while  Hatteras  simply  made  a  sign  of  acquiescence, 
and  resumed  his  seat. 

The  Doctor  brought  a  chart  and  spread  it  out  on  the  table, 
that  his  auditors  might  follow  his  narration  intelligibly,  and 
be  able  to  judge  the  merits  of  McClure  for  themselves. 

"  It  was  in  1848,"  he  said,  "  that  two  vessels,  the  Herald 
and  the  Plover,  were  sent  out  in  search  of  Franklin,  but 
their  efforts  proving  ineffectual ;  two  others  were  despatched 
to  assist  them — the  Investigator,  in  command  of  McClure, 
and  the  Enterprise,  in  command  of  Captain  Collinson.  ^  The 
Investigator  arrived  first  in  Behring's  Straits,  and  without 
awaiting  for  her  consort,  set  out  with  the  declared  purpose 
to  find  Franklin  or  the  Northwest  Passage.  The  gallant 
young  officer  hoped  to  push  north  as  far  as  Melville  Sound, 
but  just  at  the  extremity  of  the  Strait  he  was  stopped  by  an 


82  THE  DESERT  OF  ICE 

insurmountable  barrier  of  ice  and  forced  to  winter  there. 
During  the  long,  dreary  months,  however,  he  and  his  officers 
undertook  a  journey  over  the  ice-field,  to  make  sure  of  its 
communicating  with  Melville  Sound." 

"  Yes,  but  he  did  not  get  through,"  said  Altamont. 

"  Stop  a  bit,"  replied  Clawbonny ;  "  as  soon  as  a  thaw  set 
in,  McClure  renewed  his  attempt  to  bring  his  ship  into  Mel- 
ville Sound,  and  had  succeeded  in  getting  within  twenty 
miles,  when  contrary  winds  set  in,  and  dragged  her  south 
with  irresistible  violence.  This  decided  the  captain  to  alter 
his  course.  He  determined  to  go  in  a  westerly  direction; 
but  after  a  fearful  struggle  with  icebergs,  he  stuck  fast  in 
the  first  of  the  series  of  straits  which  end  in  Baffin's 
Bay,  and  was  obliged  to  winter  in  Mercy  Bay.  His  pro- 
visions would  only  hold  out  eighteen  months  longer,  but  he 
would  not  give  up.  He  set  out  on  a  sledge,  and  reached 
Melville  Island,  hoping  to  fall  in  with  some  ship  or  other, 
but  all  he  found  in  Winter  Harbor  was  a  cairn,  which  con- 
tained a  document,  stating  that  "Captain  Austin's  lieuten- 
ant, McClintock,  had  been  there  the  preceding  year.  Mc- 
Clure replaced  this  document  by  another,  which  stated  his 
intention  of  returning  to  England  by  the  Northwest  Pas- 
sage he  had  discovered,  by  Lancaster  Sound  and  Baffin's 
Bay,  and  that  in  the  event  of  his  not  being  heard  of,  he 
might  be  looked  for  north  or  west  of  Melville  Island.  Then 
he  went  back  to  Mercy  Bay  with  undaunted  courage,  to  pass 
a  third  winter.  By  the  beginning  of  March  his  stock  of 
provisions  was  so  reduced,  in  consequence  of  the  utter  scar- 
city of  game,  through  the  severity  of  the  season,  that  Mc- 
Clure resolved  to  send  half  his  men  to  England,  either  by 
Baffin's  Bay  or  by  McKenzie  River  and  Hudson's  Bay. 
The  other  half  would  manage  to  work  the  vessel  to  Europe. 
He  kept  all  his  best  sailors,  and  selected  for  departure  only 
those  to  whom  a  fourth  winter  would  have  been  fatal. 
Everything  was  arranged  for  their  leaving^  and^  the  day 
fixed,  when  McClure,  who  was  out  walking  with  Lieutenant 
Craswell,  observed  a  man  running  towards  them,  flinging  up 
his  arms  and  gesticulating  frantically,  and  on  getting  nearer 
recognized  him  as  Lieutenant  Prim,  officer  on  board  the 
Herald,  one  of  the  ships  he  had  parted  with  in  Behring's 
Straits  two  years  before.  Captain  Kellett,  the  Commander, 
had  reached  Winter  Harbor,  and  finding  McClure's  docu- 


THE   NORTHWEST   PASSAGE  83 

ment  in  the  cairn,  had  dispatched  his  lieutenant  in  search  of 
him.  McClure  accompanied  him  back,  and  arranged  with 
the  captain  to  send  him  his  batch  of  invalids.  Lieutenant 
Cms  well  took  charge  of  these  and  conveyed  them  safely  to 
Winter  Harbor.  Leaving  them  there  he  went  across  the  ice 
four  hundred  and  seventy  miles,  and  arrived  at  Isle  Beechey, 
where,  a  few  days  afterwards,  he  took  passage  with  twelve 
men  on  board  the  Phoenix,  and  reached  London  safely  on 
the  7th  of  October,  1853,  having  traversed  the  whole  ex- 
tent between  Behring's  Straits  and  Cape  Farewell." 

"  Well,  if  arriving  on  one  side  and  leaving  at  the  other 
is  not  going  through,  I  don't  know  what  is !  " 

"  Yes,  but  he  went  four  hundred  and  seventy  miles  over 
ice-fields,"  objected  Altamont 
"What  of  that?" 

"  Everything;  that  is  the  gist  of  the  whole  argument.  It 
was  not  the  Investigator  that  went  through." 

"  No,"  replied  Clawbonny,  "  for,  at  the  close  of  the  fourth 
winter,  McClure  was  obliged  to  leave  her  among  the  ice." 

"Well,  in  maritime  expeditions  the  vessel  has  to  get 
through,  and  not  the  man;  and  if  ever  the  Northwest  Pas- 
sage is  practicable,  it  will  be  for  ships  and  not  sledges.  If 
a  ship  cannot  go,  a  sloop  must." 

"  A  sloop ! "  exclaimed  Hatteras,  discovering  a  hidden 
meaning  in  the  words. 

"  Altamont,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  your  distinction  is  simply 
puerile,  and  in  that  respect  we  all  consider  that  you  are  in 
the  wrong." 

"  You  may  easily  do  that,"  returned  the  American.  "  It 
is  four  against  one,  but  that  will  not  prevent  me  from 
holding  my  own  opinion." 

"  Keep  it  and  welcome,  but  keep  it  to  yourself,  if  you 
please,  for  the  future,"  exclaimed  Hatteras. 
t  "  And  pray  what  right  have  you  to  speak  to  me  like  this, 
sir?"  shouted  Altamont,  in  a  fury. 

"  My  right  as  captain,"  returned  Hatteras,  equally  angry. 
"  Am  I  to  submit  to  your  orders,  then  ?  " 

"  Most  assuredly,  and  woe  to  you  if " 

The  Doctor  did  not  allow  him  to  proceed,  for  he  really 
feared  the  two  antagonists  might  come  to  blows.  Bell  and 
Johnson  seconded  his  endeavors  to  make  peace,  and,  after 
a  few  conciliatory  words,  Altamont  turned  on  his  heel, 


84  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

and  walked  carelessly  away,  whistling  "  Yankee  Doodle." 
Hatteras  went  outside,  and  paced  up  and  down  with  rapid 
strides.  In  about  an  hour  he  came  back,  and  retired  to 
bed  without  saying  another  word. 


CHAPTER    XVI 

ARCTIC    ARCADIA 

On  the  29th  of  May,  for  the  first  time,  the  sun  never 
set.  His  glowing  disc  just  touched  the  boundary  line  of 
the  horizon,  and  rose  again  immediately.  The  period  was 
now  entered  when  the  day  lasts  twenty- four  hours. 

Next  morning  there  was  a  magnificent  halo ;  the  monarch 
of  day  appeared  surrounded  by  a  luminous  circle,  radiant 
with  all  the  prismatic  colors.  This  phenomenon  never 
lost  its  charm  for  the  Doctor,  however  frequently  it  oc- 
curred, and  he  always  noted  carefully  down  all  particulars 
respecting  it. 

Before  long  the  feathered  tribes  began  to  return,  filling 
the  air  with  their  discordant  cries.  Flocks  of  bustards  and 
Canadian  geese  from  Florida  or  Arkansas  came  flying 
north  with  marvelous  rapidity,  bringing  spring  beneath 
their  wings.  The  Doctor  shot  several,  and  among  them 
one  or  two  cranes  and  a  solitary  stork. 

The  snow  was  now  fast  melting,  and  the  ice-fields  were 
covered  with  "  slush."  All  round  the  bay  large  pools  had 
formed,  between  which  the  soil  appeared  as  if  some  product 
of  spring. 

The  Doctor  recommenced  his  sowing,  for  he  had  plenty 
of  seed;  but  he  was  surprised  to  find  sorrel  growing  al- 
ready between  the  half-dried  stones,  and  even  pale  sickly 
heaths,  trying  to  show  their  delicate  pink  blossoms. 

At  last  it  began  to  be  really  hot  weather.  On  the  15th 
of  June  the  thermometer  stood  at  570  above  zero.  The 
Doctor  scarcely  believed  his  eyes,  but  it  was  a  positive  fact, 
and  it  was  soon  confirmed  by  the  changed  appearance  of 
the  country. 

An  excursion  was  made  to  Isle  Johnson,  but  it  turned 
out  to  be  a  barren  little  islet  of  no  importance  whatever, 
though  it  gave  the  old  boatswain  infinite  pleasure  to  know 
that  those  sea-girt  rocks  bore  his  name. 


ARCTIC   ARCADIA  85 

There  was  some  danger  of  both  house  and  stores  melt- 
ing, but  happily,  this  high  temperature  proved  exceptional, 
the  thermometer  seldom  averaging  much  above  freezing- 
point. 

By  the  middle  of  June  the  sloop  had  made  good  prog- 
ress, and  already  presented  a  shapely  appearance.  _As  Bell 
and  Johnson  took  the  work  of  construction  entirely  on 
themselves,  the  others  went  hunting,  and  succeeded  in  kill- 
ing several  deer,  in  spite  of  its  being  difficult  game  to  ap- 
proach. Altamont  adopted  the  Indian  practice  of  crawling 
on  all-fours,  and  adjusting  his  gun  and  arms  so  as  to  simu- 
late horns  and  deceive  the  timid  animal,  till  he  could  get 
near  enough  to  take  good  aim. 

Their  principal  object  of  pursuit,  however,  was  the 
musk-ox,  which  Parry  had  met  with  in  such  numbers  in 
Melville  Island ;  but  not  a  solitary  specimen  was  to  be  seen 
anywhere  about  Victoria  Bay,  and  a  distant  excursion  was, 
therefore,  resolved  upon  which  would  serve  the  double 
purpose  of  hunting  and  surveying  the  eastern  coast. 

The  three  hunters,  accompanied  by  Duk,  set  out  on  Mon- 
day, the  17th  of  June,  at  six  in  the  morning,  each  man 
armed  with  a  double-barreled  gun,  a  hatchet  and  snow- 
knife,  and  provisions  for  several  days. 

It  was  a  fine  bright  morning,  and  by  ten  o'clock  they  had 

gone  twelve  miles;  but  not  a  living  thing  had  crossed  their 

path,  and  the  hunt  threatened  to  turn  out  a  mere  excursion. 

However,  they  went  on  in  hope,  after  a  good  breakfast 

and  half-an-hour's  rest. 

The  ground  was  getting  gradually  lower,  and  presented 
a  peculiar  appearance  from  the  snow,  which  lay  here  and 
there  in  ridges  unmelted.  At  a  distance  it  looked  like  the 
sea  when  a  strong  wind  is  lashing  up  the  waves,  and  crest- 
ing them  with  a  white  foam. 

Before  long  they  reached  a  sort  of  glen,  at  the  bottom  of 
which  was  a  winding  river.  It  was  almost  completely 
thawed,  and  already  the  banks  were  clothed  with  a  species 
of  vegetation,  as  if  the  sun  had  done  his  best  to  fertilize 
the  soil.  .  . 

"  I  tell  you  what,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  a  few  enterprising 
colonists  might  make  a  fine  settlement  here.  With  a  little 
industry  and  perseverance  wonders  might  be  done  in  this 
country.    Ah!  if  I  am  not  much  mistaken,  it  has  some 


86  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

four-footed  inhabitants  already.  Those  frisky  little  fel- 
lows know  the  best  spots  to  choose." 

"Hares!  I  declare.  That's  jolly!"  said  Altamont, 
loading  his  gun. 

"  Stop !  "  cried  the  Doctor ;  "  stop,  you  furious  hunter. 
Let  the  poor  little  things  alone;  they  are  not  thinking  of 
running  away.     Look,  they  are  actually  coming  to  us." 

He  was  right,  for  presently  three  or  four  young  hares, 
gamboling  away  among  the  fresh  moss  and  tiny  heaths, 
came  running  about  their  legs  so  fearlessly  and  trustfully, 
that  even  Altamont  was  disarmed.  They  rubbed  against 
the  Doctor's  knees,  and  let  him  stroke  them  till  the  kind- 
hearted  man  could  not  help  saying  to  Altamont : 

"  Why  give  shot  to  those  who  come  for  caresses  ?  The 
death  of  these  little  beasts  could  do  us  no  good." 

"  You  say  what's  true,  Clawbonny.  Let  them  live ! " 
replied  Hatteras. 

"And  these  ptarmigans  too,  I  suppose,  and  these  long- 
legged  plovers,"  added  Altamont,  as  a  whole  covey  of  birds 
flew  down  among  the  hunters,  never  suspecting  their  dan- 
ger. Duk  could  not  tell  what  to  make  of  it,  and  stood 
stupefied. 

It  was  a  strange  and  touching  spectacle  to  see  the  pretty 
creatures;  they  flew  on  Clawbonny's  shoulders,  and  lay 
down  at  his  feet  as  if  inviting  friendly  caresses,  and  doing 
their  utmost  to  welcome  the  strangers.  The  whole  glen 
echoed  with  their  joyous  cries  as  they  darted  to  and  fro 
from  all  parts.  The  good  Doctor  seemed  some  mighty 
enchanter. 

The  hunters  had  continued  their  course  along  the  banks 
of  the  river,  when  a  sudden  bend  in  the  valley  revealed  a 
herd  of  deer,  eight  or  ten  in  number,  peacefully  browsing 
on  some  lichens  that  lay  half-buried  in  the  snow.  They 
were  charming  creatures,  so  graceful  and  gentle,  male  and 
female,  both  adorned  with  noble  antlers,  wide-spreading 
and  deeply-notched.  Their  skin  had  already  lost  its  win- 
ter whiteness,  and  began  to  assume  the  brown  tint  of  sum- 
mer. Strange  to  say,  they  appeared  not  a  whit  more  afraid 
than  the  birds  or  hares. 

The  three  men  were  now  right  in  the  center  of  the  herd, 
but  not  one  made  the  least  movement  to  run  away.  This 
time  the  worthy  Doctor  had  far  more  difficulty  in  restrain- 


ARCTIC   ARCADIA  8> 

ing  Altamont's  impatience,  for  the  mere  sight  of  such  mag- 
nificent animals  roused  his  hunting  instincts,  and  he  became 
quite  excited;  while  Hatteras,  on  the  contrary,  seemed 
really  touched  to  see  the  splendid  creatures  rubbing  their 
heads  so  affectionately  and  trustfully  against  the  good 
Clawbonny,  the  friend  of  every  living  thing. 

"  But,  I  say,"  exclaimed  Altamont,  "  didn't  we  come  out 
expressly  to  hunt  ?  " 

"  To  hunt  the  musk-ox,  and  nothing  else,"  replied  Claw- 
bonny. "Besides,  we  shouldn't  know  what  to  do  with 
this  game,  even  if  we  killed  it;  we  have  provisions  enough. 
Let  us  for  once  enjoy  the  sight  of  men  and  animals  in  per- 
fect amity." 

"It  proves  no  human  beings  have  been  here  before," 
said  Hatteras. 

"  True,  and  that  proves  something  more ;  these  animals 
are  not  of  American  origin." 

"  How  do  you  make  that  out?  "  said  Altamont. 

"  Why,  if  they  had  been  born  in  North  America  they 
would  have  known  how  to  treat  that  mammiferous  biped 
called  man,  and  would  have  fled  at  the  first  glimpse  of  us. 
No,  they  are  from  the  north,  most  likely  from  the  untrod- 
den wilds  of  Asia;  so,  Altamont,  you  have  no  right  to 
claim  them  as  fellow-countrymen." 

"Oh!  a  hunter  doesn't  examine  his  game  so  closely  as 
all  that.     Everything  is  grist  that  comes  to  his  mill." 

"All  right.  Calm  yourself,  my  brave  Nimrod!  For 
my  own  part,  I  would  rather  never  fire  another  shot  than 
make  one  of  these  beautiful  creatures  afraid  of  me.  See, 
even  Duk  fraternizes  with  them.  Believe  me,  it  is  well 
to  be  kind  where  we  can.     Kindness  is  power." 

"  Well,  well,  so  be  it,"  said  Altamont,  not  at  all  under- 
standing such  scruples.  "But  I  should  like  to  see  what 
you  would  do  if  you  had  no  weapon  but  kindness  among 
a  pack  of  bears  or  wolves!     You  wouldn't  make  much 

of  it."  T  A    ,. 

"  I  make  no  pretensions  to  charm  wild  beasts.  1  don  t 
believe  much  in  Orpheus  and  his  enchantments.  Besides, 
bears  and  wolves  would  not  come  to  us  like  these  hares, 
and  partridges,  and  deer."  . 

"Why  not?  They  have  never  seen  human  beings 
either," 


88  THE  DESERT   OF  ICE 

"  No,  but  they  are  savage  by  nature,"  said  Clawbonny, 
"  and  ferocity,  like  wickedness,  engenders  suspicion.  This 
is  true  of  men  as  well  as  animals." 

They  spent  the  whole  day  in  the  glen,  which  the  Doctor 
christened  "Arctic  Arcadia,"  and  when  evening  came  they 
lay  down  to  rest  in  the  hollow  of  a  rock,  which  seemed  as  if 
expressly  prepared  for  their  accomodation. 


CHAPTER    XVII 
altamgnt's  revenge 

Next  morning,  as  the  fine  weather  still  continued,  the 
hunters  determined  to  have  another  search  for  the  musk-ox. 
It  was  only  fair  to  give  Altamont  a  chance  with  the  dis- 
tinct understanding  that  he  should  have  the  right  of  firing, 
however  fascinating  the  game  they  might  meet.  Besides, 
the  flesh  of  the  musk-ox,  though  a  little  too  highly  impreg- 
nated with  the  smell,  is  savory  food,  and  the  hunters  would 
gladly  carry  back  a  few  pounds  of  it  to  Fort  Providence. 

During  the  first  part  of  the  day,  nothing  occurred  worth 
mentioning,  but  they  noticed  a  considerable  change  in  the 
aspect  of  the  country,  and  appearances  seemed  to  indicate 
that  they  were  approaching  a  hilly  region.  This  New 
America  was  evidently  either  a  continent  or  an  island  of 
considerable  extent. 

Duk  was  running  far  ahead  of  his  party  when  he  stopped 
suddenly  short,  and  began  sniffing  the  ground  as  if  he  had 
caught  scent  of  game.  Next  minute  he  rushed  forward 
again  with  extreme  rapidity,  and  was  speedily  out  of  sight. 
But  loud  distinct  barking  convinced  the  hunters  that  the 
faithful  fellow  had  at  last  discovered  the  desired  object. 

They  hurried  onwards,  and  after  an  hour  and  a  half's 
quick  walking,  found  him  standing  in  front  of  two  formid- 
able-looking animals,  and  barking  furiously.  The  Doctor 
recognized  them  at  once  as  belonging  to  the  musk-ox,  or 
Ovibos  genus,  as  naturalists  call  it,  by  the  very  wide  horns 
touching  each  other  at  their  base,  by  the  absence  of  muzzle, 
by  the  narrow,  square  chanfrin,  resembling  that  of  a  sheep, 
and  by  the  very  short  tail.  Their  hair  was  long  and 
thickly-matted,  and  mixed  with  fine  brown,  silky  wool. 

These  singular-looking  quadrupeds  were  not  the  least 


ALTAMQNT'S    REVENGE  89 

afraid  of  Duk,  though  extremely  surprised ;  but  at  the  first 
glimpse  of  the  hunters  they  took  flight,  and  it  was  no  easy 
task  to  go  after  them,  for  half  an  hour's  swift  running 
brought  them  no  nearer,  and  made  the  whole  party  so  out 
of  breath,  that  they  were  forced  to  come  to  a  halt. 

"  Confound  the  beasts!  "  said  Altamont. 

"  Yes,  Altamont,  I'll  make  them  over  to  you,"  replied 
Clawbonny;  "  they  are  true  Americans,  and  they  don't  ap- 
pear to  have  a  very  favorable  idea  of  their  fellow-country- 
men." 

"  That  proves  our  hunting  prowess,"  rejoined  Altamont. 

Meantime  the  oxen  finding  themselves  no  longer  pur- 
sued, had  stopped  short.  Further  pursuit  was  evidently 
useless.  If  they  were  to  be  captured  at  all  they  must  be 
surrounded,  and  the  plateau  which  they  first  happened  to 
have  reached,  was  very  favorable  for  the  purpose.  Leav- 
ing Duk  to  worry  them,  they  went  down  by  the  neighboring 
ravines,  and  got  to  the  one  end  of  the  plateau,  where  Alta- 
mont and  the  Doctor  hid  themselves  behind  projecting 
rocks,  while  Hatteras  went  on  to  the  other  end,  intending 
to  startle  the  animals  by  his  sudden  appearance,  and  drive 
them  back  towards  his  companions. 

"  I  suppose  you  have  no  objections  this  time  to  bestow 
a  few  bullets  on  these  gentry?"  said  Altamont. 

"Oh,  no,  it  is  ' a  fair  field  now,  and  no  favor.'"  re- 
turned Clawbonny. 

The  oxen  had  begun  to  shake  themselves  impatiently  at 
Duk,  trying  to  kick  him  off,  when  Hatteras  started  up  right 
in  front  of  them,  shouting  and  chasing  them  back.  This 
was  the  signal  for  Altamont  and  the  Doctor  to  rush  for- 
ward and  fire,  but  at  the  sight  of  two  assailants,  the  terri- 
fied animals  wheeled  round  and  attacked  Hatteras.  He 
met  their  onset  with  a  firm,  steady  foot,  and  fired  straight 
at  their  heads.  But  both  his  balls  were  powerless,  and 
only  served  still  further  to  madden  the  enraged  beasts. 
They  rushed  upon  the  unfortunate  man  like  furies,  and 
threw  him  on  the  ground  in  an  instant 

"  He  is  a  dead  man !  "  exclaimed  the  Doctor,  in  despair- 
ing accents. 

A  tremendous  struggle  was  going  on  in  Altamont's 
breast  at  the  sight  of  his  prostrate  foe,  and  though  his  first 
impulse  was  to  hasten  to  his  help,  he  stopped  short,  bat- 


90  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

tling  with  himself  and  his  prejudices.  But  his  hesitation 
scarcely  lasted  half  a  second,  his  better  self  conquered,  and 
exclaiming,  "  No,  it  would  be  cowardly !  "  he  rushed  for- 
ward with  Clawbonny. 

Hatteras  full  well  understood  how  his  rival  felt,  but 
would  rather  have  died  than  have  begged  his  intervention. 
However,  he  had  hardly  time  to  think  about  it,  before  Alta- 
mont  was  at  his  side. 

He  could  not  have  held  out  much  longer,  for  it  was  im- 
possible to  ward  off  the  blows  of  horns  and  hoofs  of  two 
such  powerful  antagonists,  and  in  a  few  minutes  more  he 
must  have  been  torn  to  pieces.  But  suddenly  two  shots 
resounded,  and  Hatteras  felt  the  balls  graze  his  head. 

"  Courage !  "  shouted  Altamont,  flinging  away  his  dis- 
charged weapon,  and  throwing  himself  right  in  front  of 
the  raging  animals.  One  of  them,  shot  to  the  heart,  fell 
dead  as  he  reached  the  spot,  while  the  other  dashed  madly 
on  Hatteras,  and  was  about  to  gore  the  unfortunate  cap- 
tain with  his  horns,  when  Altamont  plunged  his  snow 
knife  far  into  the  beast's  wide  open  jaws  with  one  hand, 
with  the  other  dealt  him  such  a  tremendous  blow  on  the 
head  with  his  hatchet,  that  the  skull  was  completely  split 
open. 

It  was  done  so  quickly  that  it  seemed  like  a  flash  of  light- 
ning, and  all  was  over.  The  second  ox  lay  dead,  and 
Clawbonny  shouted  "  Hurrah !  hurrah !  " 

Hatteras  was  saved. 

He  owed  his  life  to  the  man  he  hated  the  most.  What 
a  storm  of  conflicting  passions  this  must  have  roused  in 
his  soul!  But  where  was  the  emotion  he  could  not 
master  ? 

However,  his  action  was  prompt,  whatever  his  feeling 
might  be.  Without  a  moment's  hesitancy,  he  went  up  to 
his  rival,  and  said  in  a  grave  voice : 

"Altamont,  you  have  saved  my  life!" 

"  You  saved  mine,"  replied  the  American. 

There  was  a  moment's  silence,  and  then  Altamont  added : 

"  We're  quits,  Hatteras." 

"  No,  Altamont,"  said  the  captain ;  "  when  the  Doctor 
dragged  you  out  of  your  icy  tomb,  I  did  not  know  who 
you  were;  but  you  saved  me  at  the  peril  of  your  own  life, 
knowing  quite  well  who  I  was." 


ALTAMONT'S   REVENGE  91 

"  Why,  you  are  a  fellow-creature  at  any  rate,  and  what- 
ever faults  an  American  may  have,  he  is  no  coward." 

"  No,  indeed,"  said  the  Doctor.  "  He  is  a  man,  every 
inch  as  much  as  yourself,  Hatteras." 

"And,  like  me,  he  shall  have  part  in  the  glory  that 
awaits  us." 

"  The  glory  of  reaching  the  North  Pole  ?  "  asked  Alta- 
mont. 

"  Yes,"  replied  Hatteras,  proudly. 

"I  guessed  right,  then,"  said  Altamont.  "And  you 
have  actually  dared  to  conceive  such  a  project.  Oh!  it  is 
grand;  I  tell  you  it  is  sublime  even  to  think  of  it!  " 

"  But  tell  me,"  said  Hatteras  in  a  hurried  manner;  "you 
were  not  bound  for  the  Pole  then  yourself?  " 

Altamont  hesitated. 

"  Come,  speak  out,  man,"  urged  the  Doctor. 

"  Well,  to  tell  the  truth,  I  was  not,  and  the  truth  is  bet- 
ter than  self-love.  No,  I  had  no  such  grand  purpose  in 
view.  I  was  trying  to  clear  the  Northwest  Passage,  and 
that  was  all." 

"Altamont,"  said  Hatteras,  holding  out  his  hand;  "be 
our  companion  to  glory,  come  with  us  and  find  the  North 
Pole." 

The  two  men  clasped  hands  in  a  warm,  hearty  grasp, 
and  a  strong  bond  of  friendship  between  them  was 
sealed. 

When  they  turned  to  look  for  the  Doctor  they  found 
him  in  tears.  "Ah!  friends,"  he  said,  wiping  his  eyes; 
"  you  have  made  me  so  happy,  it  is  almost  more  than  I  can 
bear!  You  have  sacrificed  this  miserable  nationality  for 
the  sake  of  the  common  cause.  You  have  said,  '  What 
does  it  matter  if  only  the  Pole  is  discovered,  whether  it  is 
by  an  Englishman  or  an  American  ? '  Why  should  we 
brag  of  being  American  or  English,  when  we  can  boast 
that  we  are  men?  " 

The  good  little  man  was  beside  himself  with  joy.  He 
hugged  the  reconciled  enemies  to  his  bosom,  and  cemented 
their  friendship  by  his  own  affection  to  both. 

At  last  he  grew  calm,  after  at  least  a  twentieth  embrace, 
and  said: 

"  It  is  time  I  went  to  work  now.  Since  I  am  no  hunter, 
I  must  use  my  talents  in  another  direction." 


92  THE   DESERT   OF    ICE 

And  he  began  to  cut  up  the  oxen  so  skillfully,  that  he 
seemed  like  a  surgeon  making  a  delicate  autopsy. 

His  two  companions  looked  on,  smiling.  In  a  few  min- 
utes the  adroit  operator  had  cut  off  more  than  a  hundred 
pounds  of  flesh.  This  he  divided  into  three  parts.  Each 
man  took  one,  and  they  retraced  their  steps  to  Fort  Provi- 
dence. 

At  ten  oclock  they  arrived  at  Doctor's  House,  where 
Johnson  and  Bell  had  a  good  supper  prepared  for  them. 

But  before  sitting  down  to  enjoy  it,  the  Doctor  ex- 
claimed in  a  jubilant  tone,  and  pointing  to  his  two  com- 
panions : 

"  My  dear  old  Johnson,  I  took  out  an  American  and  an 
Englishman  with  me,  didn't  I?  " 

"Yes,  Mr.  Clawbonny." 

"  Well,  I  bring  back  two  brothers." 

This  was  joyous  news  to  the  sailors,  and  they  shook 
hands  warmly  with  Altamont;  while  the  Doctor  recounted 
all  that  had  passed,  and  how  the  American  captain  had 
saved  the  English  captain's  life.  That  night  no  five  hap- 
pier men  could  have  been  found  than  those  that  lay  sleep- 
ing in  the  little  snow-house. 


CHAPTER   XVIII 

FINAL   PREPARATIONS 

Next  day  the  weather  changed,  the  cold  returned. 
Snow,  and  rain,  and  tempest  came  in  quick  succession  for 
several  days. 

Bell  had  completed  the  sloop,  and  done  his  work  well, 
for  the  little  vessel  was  admirably  adapted  for  the  purpose 
contemplated,  being  high  at  the  sides  and  partly  decked,  so 
as  to  be  able  to  stand  a  heavy  sea,  and  yet  light  enough  to 
be  drawn  on  the  sledge  without  over-burdening  the  dogs. 

At  last  a  change  of  the  greatest  importance  took  place. 
The  ice  began  to  tremble  in  the  center  of  the  bay,  and  the 
highest  masses  became  loosened  at  their  base  ready  to  form 
icebergs,  and  drift  away  before  the  first  gale;  but  Hatteras 
would  not  wait  for  the  ice-fields  to  break  up  before  he 
started.  Since  the  journey  must  be  made  on  land,  he  did 
not  care  whether  the  sea  was  open  or  not;  and  the  day  of 


FINAL    PREPARATIONS  93 

departure  was  fixed  for  the  25th  of  June — Johnson  and 
Bell  undertaking  the  necessary  repairs  of  the  sledge. 

On  the  20th,  finding  there  was  space  enough  between 
the  broken  ice  to  allow  the  sloop  to  get  through,  it  was  de- 
termined to  take  her  a  trial  trip  to  Cape  Washington. 
The  sea  was  not  quite  open,  but  it  would  have  been  impos- 
sible to  go  across  on  foot. 

This  short  sail  of  six  hours  sufficiently  tested  the  powers 
of  the  sloop,  and  proved  her  excellent  qualities.  In  com- 
ing back  they  witnessed  a  curious  sight;  it  was  the  chase 
of  a  seal  by  a  gigantic  bear.  Mr.  Bruin  was  too  busily 
engaged  to  notice  the  vessel,  or  he  would  have  pursued ;  he 
was  intently  watching  beside  a  seal-hole  with  the  patience 
of  a  true  hunter,  or  rather  angler,  for  he  was  certainly 
fishing  just  then.  He  watched  in  absolute  silence,  without 
stirring  or  giving  the  least  sign  of  life. 

But  all  of  a  sudden  there  was  a  slight  disturbance  on 
the  surface  of  the  water  in  the  hole,  which  announced  the 
coming  up  of  the  amphibious  animal  to  breathe.  Instantly 
the  bear  lay  flat  on  his  belly,  with  his  two  paws  stretched 
round  the  opening. 

Next  minute  up  came  the  seal,  but  his  head  no  sooner 
appeared  above  the  water  than  the  bear's  paws  closed  about 
him  like  a  vise,  and  dragged  him  right  out.  The  poor  seal 
struggled  desperately,  but  could  not  free  himself  from  the 
iron  grasp  of  his  enemy,  who  hugged  him  closer  and  closer 
till  suffocation  was  complete.  Then  he  carried  him  off  to 
his  den  as  if  the  weight  were  nothing,  leaping  lightly  from 
pack  to  pack  till  he  gained  terra  firma  safely. 

On  the  22nd  of  June,  Hatteras  began  to  load  the  sledge. 
They  put  in  200  lbs.  of  salt  meat,  three  cases  of  vegetables 
and  preserved  meat,  besides  lime-juice,  and  flour,  and  medi- 
cines. They  also  took  200  lbs.  of  powder  and  a  stock  of 
fire-arms.  Including  the  sloop  and  the  Halkett-boat,  there 
was  about  1,500  lbs.  weight,  a  heavy  load  for  four  dogs, 
and  all  the  more  as  they  would  have  to  drag  it  every  day, 
instead  of  only  four  days  successivel}',  like  the  dogs  em- 
ployed by  the  Esquimaux,  who  always  keep  a  relay  for 
their  sledges.  However,  the  distance  to  the  Pole  was  not 
350  miles  at  the  outside,  and  they  did  not  intend  to  go  more 
than  twelve  miles  a  day,  as  they  could  do  it  comfortably 
in  a  month.     Even  if  land  failed  them,  they  could  always 


94  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

fall  back  on  the  sloop,  and  finish  the  journey  without  fa- 
tigue to  men  or  dogs. 

All  the  party  were  in  excellent  health,  though  they  had 
lost  flesh  a  little;  but,  by  attending  to  the  Doctor's  wise 
counsel,  they  had  weathered  the  winter  without  being  at- 
tacked by  any  of  the  maladies  incident  to  the  climate. 

Now,  they  were  almost  at  their  journey's  end,  and  no 
one  doubted  of  success,  for  a  common  bond  of  sympathy 
bound  fast  the  five  men,  and  made  them  strong  to  perse- 
vere. On  Sunday,  the  23rd,  all  was  ready,  and  it  was 
resolved  to  devote  the  entire  day  to  rest. 

The  dwellers  on  Fort  Providence  could  not  see  the  last 
day  dawn  without  some  emotion.  It  cost  them  a  pang  to 
leave  the  snow-hut  which  had  served  them  in  such  good 
stead,  and  this  hospitable  shore  where  they  had  passed  the 
winter.  Take  it  altogether,  they  had  spent  very  happy 
hours  there,  and  the  Doctor  made  a  touching  reference  to 
the  subject  as  they  sat  round  the  table  at  the  evening  meal, 
and  did  not  forget  to  thank  God  for  his  manifest  protec- 
tion. 

They  retired  early  to  rest,  for  they  needed  to  be  up  be- 
times.    So  passed  the  last  night  in  Fort  Providence. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

MARCH  TO  THE   NORTH 

Next  day  at  early  dawn,  Hatteras  gave  the  signal  for 
departure.  The  well-fed  and  well-rested  dogs  were  har- 
nessed to  the  sledge.  They  had  been  having  a  good  time 
of  it  all  the  winter,  and  might  be  expected  to  do  good  serv- 
ice during  the  summer. 

It  was  at  six  in  the  morning  when  the  expedition  started. 
After  following  the  windings  of  the  bay  and  going  past 
Cape  Washington,  they  struck  into  the  direct  route  for  the 
north,  and  by  seven  o'clock  had  loft  sight  of  the  lighthouse 
and  Fort  Providence. 

During  the  first  two  days  they  made  twenty  miles  in 
twelve  hours,  devoting  the  remainder  of  the  time  to  rest 
and  meals.  The  tent  was  quite  sufficient  for  protection 
during  sleep. 

The  temperature  began  to  rise.     In  many  places  the 


MARCH   TO  THE  NORTH  95 

snow  melted  entirely  away,  and  great  patches  of  water  ap- 
peared; here  and  there  complete  ponds,  which  a  little 
stretch  of  imagination  might  easily  convert  into  lakes. 
The  travelers  were  often  up  to  their  knees,  but  they  only 
laughed  over  it:  and,  indeed,  the  Doctor  was  rather  glad 
of  such  unexpected  baths. 

"  But  for  all  that,"  he  said,  "  the  water  has  no  business 
to  wet  us  here.  It  is  an  element  which  has  no  right  in  this 
country,  except  in  a  solid  or  vaporous  state.  Ice  or  vapor 
is  all  very  well,  but  water — never!  " 

Hunting  was  not  forgotten  during  the  march,  for  fresh 
meat  was  a  necessity.  Altamont  and  Bell  kept  their  guns 
loaded,  and  shot  ptarmigans,  guillemots,  geese,  and  a  few 
young  hares;  but,  by  degrees,  birds  and  animals  had  been 
changing  from  trustfulness  to  fear,  and  had  become  so 
shy  and  difficult  to  approach,  that  very  often,  but  for  Duk, 
the  hunters  would  have  wasted  their  powder. 

Hatteras  advised  them  not  to  go  more  than  a  mile  away, 
as  there  was  not  a  day,  nor  even  an  hour,  to  lose,  for  three 
months  of  fine  weather  was  the  utmost  they  could  count 
upon.  Besides,  the  sledge  was  often  coming  to  difficult 
places,  when  each  man  was  needed  to  lend  a  helping  hand. 

On  the  third  day  they  came  to  a  lake,  several  acres  in 
extent,  and  still  entirely  frozen  over.  The  suns  rays  had 
little  access  to  it,  owing  to  its  situation,  and  the  ice  was 
so  strong  that  it  must  have  dated  from  some  remote  win- 
ter. It  was  strong  enough  to  bear  both  the  travelers  and 
their  sledge,  and  was  covered  with  dry  snow. 

From  this  point  the  country  became  gradually  lower, 
from  which  the  Doctor  concluded  that  it  did  not  extend  to 
the  Pole,  but  that  most  probably  this  New  America  was  an 
island. 

Up  to  this  time  the  expedition  had  been  attended  with 
no  fatigue.  The  travelers  had  only  suffered  from  the  in- 
tense glare  of  the  sun  on  the  snow,  which  threatened  them 
with  snow-blindness.  At  another  time  of  the  year  they 
might  have  avoided  this  by  walking  during  the  night,  but 
at  present  there  was  no  night  at  all.  Happily  the  snow 
was  beginning  to  melt,  and  the  brilliancy  would  diminish 
as  the  process  of  dissolution  advanced. 

On  the  8th  of  June  the  thermometer  rose  to  45  °  and  the 
rain  fell  in  torrents.     Hatteras  and  his  companions,  how- 


96  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

ever,  marched  stoically  on,  and  even  hailed  the  downpour 
with  delight,  knowing  that  it  would  hasten  the  disappear- 
ance of  the  snow. 

As  they  went  along  the  Doctor  often  picked  up  stones, 
both  round  ones  and  flat  pebbles,  as  if  worn  away  by  the 
tide.  He  thought  from  this  they  must  be  near  the  Polar 
Basin,  and  yet  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  was  one  inter- 
minable plain. 

There  was  not  a  trace  of  houses,  or  huts,  or  cairns  vis- 
ible. It  was  evident  that  the  Greenlanders  had  not  pushed 
their  way  so  far  north,  and  yet  the  famished  tribes  would 
have  found  their  account  in  coming,  for  the  country 
abounded  in  game.  Bears  were  frequently  seen,  and  nu- 
merous herds  of  musk-oxen  and  deer. 

On  the  29th  Bell  killed  a  fox,  and  Altamont  a  musk-ox. 
These  supplies  of  fresh  food  were  very  acceptable,  and  even 
the  Doctor  surveyed,  with  considerable  satisfaction,  the 
haunches  of  meat  they  managed  to  procure  from  time  to 
time. 

"  Don't  let  us  stint  ourselves,"  he  used  'to  say  on  these 
occasions ;  "  food  is  no  unimportant  matter  in  expeditions 
like  ours." 

"  Especially,"  said  Johnson,  "  when  a  meal  depends  on 
a  lucky  shot." 

"You're  right,  Johnson;  a  man  does  not  think  so  much 
about  dinner  when  he  knows  the  soup-pot  is  simmering 
by  the  kitchen-fire." 

On  the  30th,  they  came  to  a  district  which  seemed  to 
have  been  upturned  by  some  volcanic  convulsion,  so  cov- 
ered was  it  with  cones  and  sharp  lofty  peaks.  A  strong 
breeze  from  the  southeast  was  blowing,  which  soon  in- 
creased to  a  hurricane,  sweeping  over  the  rocks  covered 
with  snow  and  the  huge  masses  of  ice,  which  took  the 
forms  of  icebergs  and  hummocks,  though  on  dry  land. 

The  tempest  was  followed  by  damp,  warm  weather, 
which  caused  a  regular  thaw.  On  all  sides  nothing  could 
be  heard  but  the  noise  of  cracking  ice  and  falling  ava- 
lanches. The  travelers  had  to  be  very  careful  in  avoiding 
hills,  and  even  in  speaking  aloud,  for  the  slightest  agita- 
tion in  the  air  might  have  caused  a  catastrophe.  Indeed, 
the  suddenness  is  the  peculiar  feature  in  Arctic  avalanches, 
distinguishing  them  from  those  of  Switzerland  and  Nor- 

V.  Ill  Verne 


MARCH   TO   THE  NORTH  97 

way.  Often  the  dislodgment  of  a  block  of  ice  is  instan- 
taneous, and  not  even  a  cannon-ball  or  thunderbolt  could 
be  more  rapid  in  its  descent.  The  loosening,  the  fall,  and 
the  crash  happen  almost  simultaneously. 

Happily,  however,  no  accident  befell  any  of  the  party,  and 
three  days  afterwards  they  came  to  smooth,  level  ground 
again.  But  here  a  new  phenomenon  met  their  gaze — a 
phenomenon  which  was  long  a  subject  of  patient  inquiry 
among  the  learned  of  both  hemispheres.  They  came  to  a 
long  chain  of  low  hills  which  seemed  to  extend  for  miles, 
and  were  all  covered  on  the  eastern  side  with  bright  red 
snow. 

It  is  easy  to  imagine  the  surprise  and  half-terrified  ex- 
clamation of  the  little  company  at  the  sight  of  this  long  red 
curtain ;  but  the  Doctor  hastened  to  reassure  them,  or  rather 
to  instruct  them,  as  to  the  nature  of  this  peculiar  snow. 
He  told  them  that  this  same  red  substance  had  been  found 
in  Switzerland,  in  the  heart  of  the  Alps,  and  that  the  color 
proceeded  solely  from  the  presence  of  certain  corpuscles, 
about  the  nature  of  which  for  a  long  time  chemists  could 
not  agree.  They  could  not  decide  whether  these  corpuscles 
were  of  animal  or  vegetable  origin,  but  at  last  it  was  set- 
tled that  they  belonged  to  the  family  of  fungi,  being  a  sort 
of  microscopic  champignon  of  the  species  Uredo. 

Turning  the  snow  over  with  his  iron-tipped  staff,  the 
Doctor  found  that  the  coloring  matter  measured  nine  feet 
deep.  He  pointed  this  out  to  his  companions,  that  they 
might  have  some  idea  of  the  enormous  number  of  these 
tiny  mushrooms  in  a  layer  extending  so  many  miles. 

This  phenomenon  was  none  the  less  strange  for  being 
explained,  for  red  is  a  color  seldom  seen  in  nature  over 
any  considerable  area.  The  reflection  of  the  sun's  rays 
upon  it  produced  the  most  peculiar  effect,  lighting  up  men, 
and  animals,  and  rocks  with  a  fiery  glow,  as  if  proceeding 
from  some  flame  within.  When  the  snow  melted  it  looked 
like  blood,  as  the  red  particles  do  not  decompose.  It 
seemed  to  the  travelers  as  if  rivulets  of  blood  were  running 
among  their  feet. 

The  Doctor  filled  several  bottles  with  this  precious  sub- 
stance to  examine  at  leisure,  as  he  had  only  had  a  passing 
glimpse  of  the  Crimson  Cliffs  in  Baffin's  Bay. 

This  Field  of  Blood,  as  he  called  it,  took  three  hours 
to  get  over,  and  then  the  country  resumed  its  usual  aspect. 


CHAPTER   XX 

FOOTPRINTS  IN  THE  SNOW 

On  the  fourth  of  July  there  was  such  an  exceedingly 
dense  fog,  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  keep  the  straight 
course  for  the  north.  No  misadventure,  however,  befell 
the  party  during  the  darkness,  except  the  loss  of  Bell's 
snow-shoes.  At  Bell's  suggestion,  which  fired  the  Doc- 
tor's inventive  genius,  torches  were  contrived,  made  of 
tow  steeped  in  spirits-of-wine  and  fastened  on  the  end  of  a 
stick,  and  these  served  somewhat  to  help  them  on,  though 
they  made  but  small  progress ;  for,  on  the  sixth,  after  the 
fog  had  cleared  off,  the  Doctor  took  their  bearings,  and 
found  that  they  had  only  been  marching  at  the  rate  of 
eight  miles  a  day. 

Determined  to  make  up  for  lost  time,  they  rose  next 
morning  very  early  and  started  off,  Bell  and  Altamont  as 
usual  going  ahead  of  the  rest  and  acting  as  scouts.  John- 
son and  the  others  kept  beside  the  sledge,  and  were  soon 
nearly  two  miles  behind  the  guides;  but  the  weather  was 
so  dry  and  clear  that  all  their  movements  could  be  dis- 
tinctly observed. 

"What  now?"  said  Clawbonny,  as  he  saw  them  make 
a  sudden  halt,  and  stoop  down  as  if  examining  the  ground. 

"  I  was  just  wondering  what  they  are  about,  myself," 
replied  old  Johnson. 

"  Perhaps  they  have  come  on  the  tracks  of  animals/' 
suggested  Hatteras. 

"  No,"  said  Clawbonny,  "  it  can't  be  that." 

"Why  not?" 

"  Because  Duk  would  bark." 

"  Well,  it  is  quite  evident  they  are  examining  some  sort 
of  marks." 

"  Let's  go  on,  then,"  said  Hatteras ;  and,  urging  forward 
the  dogs,  they  rejoined  their  companions  in  about  twenty 
minutes,  and  shared  their  surprise  at  finding  unmistakable 
fresh  footprints  of  human  beings  in  the  snow,  as  plainly 
as  if  only  made  the  preceding  day. 

"  They  are  Esquimaux  footprints,"  said  Hatteras. 

"  Do  you  think  so  ?  "  asked  Altamont. 

"  There  is  no  doubt  of  it." 

"  But  what  do  you  make  of  this,  then  ? "  returned  Alta- 
mont,  pointing  to   another  footmark   repeated  in    several 


FOOTPRINTS    IN   THE    SNOW  99 

places.  "  Do  you  believe  for  a  minute  that  was  made  by 
an  Esquimaux  ?  " 

It  was  incontestibly  the  print  of  a  European  boot — nails, 
sole,  and  heel  clearly  stamped  in  the  snow.  There  was 
no  room  for  doubt,  and  Hatteras  exclaimed  in  amazement  : 
"  Europeans  here !  " 

"  Evidently,"  said  Johnson. 

"  And  yet  it  is  so  improbable  that  we  must  take  a  second 
look  before  pronouncing  an  opinion,"  said  Clawbonny. 

But  the  longer  he  looked  the  more  apparent  became  the 
fact.  Hatteras  was  chagrined  beyond  measure.  A  Euro- 
pean here,  so  near  the  Pole ! 

The  footprints  extended  for  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile, 
and  then  diverged  to  the  west.  Should  the  travelers  fol- 
low them  farther  ? 

"  No,"  said  Hatteras,  "  let  us  go  on." 

He  was  interrupted  by  an  exclamation  from  the  Doctor, 
who  had  just  picked  up  an  object  that  gave  still  more  con- 
vincing proof  of  European  origin.  It  was  part  of  a 
pocket  spy-glass ! 

"  Well,  if  we  still  had  any  doubts  about  the  footmarks, 
this  settles  the  case  at  once,  at  any  rate,"  said  Clawbonny. 

"  Forward !  "  exclaimed  Hatteras  so  energetically  that 
instinctively  each  one  obeyed,  and  the  march  was  resumed 
forthwith.  The  day  wore  away,  but  no  further  sign  of 
the  presence  of  suspected  rivals  was  discovered,  and  they 
prepared  to  encamp  for  the  night.  The  tent  was  pitched 
in  a  ravine  for  shelter,  as  the  sky  was  dark  and  threaten- 
ing, and  a  violent  north  wind  was  blowing. 

"  I'm  afraid  we'll  have  a  bad  night,"  said  Johnson. 

"  A  pretty  noisy  one,  I  expect,"  replied  the  Doctor,  "  but 
not  cold.  We  had  better  take  every  precaution,  and  fasten 
down  our  tent  with  good  big  stones." 

"You  are  right,  Mr.  Clawbonny.  If  the  hurricane 
swept  away  our  tent,  I  don't  know  where  we  should  find  it 
again." 

The  tent  held  fast,  but  sleep  was  impossible,  for  the 
tempest  was  let  loose  and  raged  with  tremendous  violence 
during  the  night. 

"It  seems  to  me,"  said  the  Doctor,  during  a  brief  lull 
in  the  deafening  roar,  "  as  if  I  could  hear  the  sound  of 
collisions  between  icebergs  and  ice-fields.     If  we  were  near 


ioo  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

the  sea,  I  could  really  believe  there  was  a  general  break- 
up in  the  ice." 

"  I  can't  explain  the  noises  any  other  way,"  said  Johnson. 

"  Can  we  have  reached  the  coast,  I  wonder?  "  asked  Hat- 
teras. 

"  It  is  not  impossible,"  replied  Clawbonny.  "  Listen ! 
Do  you  hear  that  crash?  That  is  certainly  the  sound  of 
icebergs  falling.  We  surely  cannot  be  very  far  from  the 
Ocean." 

"Well,  if  it  turns  out  to  be  so,  I  shall  push  right  on 
over  the  ice-fields." 

"  Oh,  they'll  be  all  broken  up  after  such  a  storm  as 
this.  We  shall  see  what  to-morrow  brings;  but  all  I  can 
say  is,  if  any  poor  fellows  are  wandering  about  in  a  night 
like  this,  I  pity  them." 

The  storm  lasted  for  ten  hours,  and  the  weary  travelers 
anxiously  watched  for  the  morning.  About  daybreak  its 
fury  seemed  to  have  spent  itself,  and  Hatteras,  accom- 
panied by  Bell  and  Altamont,  ventured  to  leave  the  tent. 
They  climbed  a  hill  about  three  hundred  feet  high,  which 
commanded  a  wide  view.  But  what  a  metamorphosed  re- 
gion met  their  gaze !  All  the  ice  had  completely  vanished, 
the  storm  had  chased  away  the  winter,  and  stripped  the 
soil  everywhere  of  its  snow  covering. 

But  Hatteras  scarcely  bestowed  a  glance  on  surrounding 
objects;  his  eager  gaze  was  bent  on  the  northern  horizon, 
which  appeared  shrouded  in  black  mist. 

"That  may  very  likely  be  caused  by  the  ocean,"  sug- 
gested Clawbonny. 

"  You  are  right.     The  sea  must  be  there,"  was  the  reply. 

"That  tint  is  what  we  call  the  blink  of  open  water," 
said  Johnson. 

"  Come  on,  then,  to  the  sledge  at  once,  and  let  us  get  to 
this  unknown  ocean,"  exclaimed  Hatteras. 

Their  few  preparations  were  soon  made,  and  the  macrh 
resumed.  Three  hours  afterwards  they  arrived  at  the 
coast,  and  shouted  simultaneously,  "  The  sea !  the  sea ! " 

"  Ay,  and  open  sea !  "  added  Hatteras. 

And  so  it  was.  The  storm  had  opened  wide  the  Polar 
Basin,  and  the  loosened  packs  were  drifting  in  all  direc- 
tions. The  icebergs  had  weighed  anchor,  and  were  sailing 
out  into  the  open  sea. 


FOOTPRINTS   IN   THE   SNOW  ior 

This  new  ocean  stretched  far  away  out  of  sight,  and  not 
a  single  island  or  continent  was  visible. 

On  the  east  and  west  the  coast  formed  two  capes  or 
headlands,  which  sloped  gently  down  to  the  sea.  In  the 
center,  a  projecting  rock  formed  a  small  natural  bay,  shel- 
tered on  three  sides,  into  which  a  wide  river  fell,  bearing 
in  its  bosom  the  melted  snows  of  winter. 

After  a  careful  survey  of  the  coast,  Hatteras  determined 
to  launch  the  sloop  that  very  day,  and  to  unpack  the  sledge, 
and  get  everything  on  board.  The  tent  was  soon  put  up, 
and  a  comfortable  repast  prepared.  This  important  busi- 
ness despatched,  work  commenced;  and  all  hands  were  so 
expeditious  and  willing,  that  by  five  o'clock  nothing  more 
remained  to  be  done.  The  sloop  lay  rocking  gracefully 
in  the  little  bay,  and  all  the  cargo  was  on  board  the  boat 
except  the  tent,  and  what  was  required  for  the  night's  en- 
campment. 

The  sight  of  the  sloop  suggested  to  Clawbonny  the  pro- 
priety of  giving  Altamont's  name  to  the  little  bay.  His 
proposition  to  that  effect  met  with  unanimous  approval, 
and  the  port  was  forthwith  dignified  by  the  title  of  Alta- 
mont  Harbor. 

According  to  the  Doctor's  calculations,  the  travelers 
were  now  only  30  distant  from  the  Pole.  They  had  gone 
over  two  hundred  miles  from  Victoria  Bay  to  Altamont 
Harbor,  and  were  in  latitude  870  5'  and  longitude  118°  35'. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

THE  OPEN  SEA 

Next  morning  by  eight  o'clock  all  the  remaining  effects 
were  on  board,  and  the  preparations  for  departure  com- 
pleted. But  before  starting  the  Doctor  thought  he  would 
like  to  take  a  last  look  at  the  country  and  see  if  any  further 
traces  of  the  presence  of  strangers  could  be  discovered,  for 
the  mysterious  footmarks  they  had  met  with  were  never 
out  of  his  thoughts.  He  climbed  to  the  top  of  a  height 
which  commanded  a  view  of  the  whole  southern  horizon, 
and  took  out  his  pocket-telescope.  But  what  was  his  as- 
tonishment to  find  he  could  see  nothing  through  it,  not  even 
neighboring  objects.     He  rubbed  his  eyes  and  looked  again, 


'102  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

but  with  no  better  result.  Then  he  began  to  examine  the 
telescope,  the  object-glass  was  gone! 

The  object-glass!  This  explained  the  whole  mystery, 
footprints  and  all;  and  with  a  shout  of  surprise  he  hurried 
down  the  hill  to  impart  his  discovery  to  the  wondering 
companions,  who  came  running  towards  him,  startled  by 
his  loud  exclamation,  and  full  of  anxiety  at  his  precipitate 
descent. 

"  Well,  what  is  the  matter  now  ?  "  said  Johnson. 

The  Doctor  could  hardly  speak,  he  was  so  out  of  breath. 
At  last  he  managed  to  gasp  out : 

"  The  tracks,  footmarks,  strangers." 

"What?  "  said  Hatteras,  "  strangers  here?  " 

"No,  no,  the  object-glass;  the  object-glass  out  of  my 
telescope." 

And  he  held  out  his  spy-glass  for  them  to  look  at. 

"Ah!  I  see,"  said  Altamont,  "it  is  wanting." 

"  Yes." 

"  But  then  the  footmarks." 

"  They  were  ours,  friends,  just  ours,"  exclaimed  the  Doc- 
tor. "  We  had  lost  ourselves  in  the  fog,  and  been  wan- 
dering in  a  circle." 

"  But  the  boot  marks,"  objected  Hatteras. 

"  Bell's.  He  walked  about  a  whole  day  after  he  had  lost 
his  snow  shoes." 

"  So  I  did,"  said  Bell.  The  mistake  was  so  evident,  that 
they  all  laughed  heartily,  except  Hatteras,  though  no  one 
was  more  glad  than  he  at  the  discovery. 

A  quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards  the  little  sloop  sailed 
out  of  Altamont  Harbor,  and  commenced  her  voyage  of 
discovery.  The  wind  was  favorable,  but  there  was  little 
of  it,  and  the  weather  was  positively  warm. 

The  sloop  was  none  the  worse  for  the  sledge  journey. 
She  was  in  first-rate  trim,  and  easily  managed.  Johnson 
steered,  the  Doctor,  Bell,  and  the  American  leaned  back 
against  the  cargo,  and  Hatteras  stood  at  the  prow,  his 
fixed,  eager  gaze  bent  steadily  on  that  mysterious  point 
towards  which  he  felt  drawn  with  irresistible  power,  like 
the  magnetic  needle,  to  the  Pole.  He  wished  to  be  the 
first  to  descry  any  shore  that  might  come  in  sight,  and  he 
had  every  right  to  the  honor. 

The  water  of  this  Polar  Sea  presented  some  peculiar 


THE  OPEN   SEA  103 

features  worth  mentioning.  In  color  it  was  a  faint  ultra- 
marine blue,  and  possessed  such  a  wonderful  transparency 
that  one  seemed  to  gaze  down  into  fathomless  depths. 
These  depths  were  lighted  up,  no  doubt,  by  some  electrical 
phenomenon,  and  so  many  varieties  of  living  creatures 
were  visible  that  the  vessel  seemed  to  be  sailing  over  a  vast 
aquarium. 

Innumerable  flocks  of  birds  were  flying  over  the  surface 
of  this  marvelous  ocean,  darkening  the  sky  like  thick  heavy 
storm-clouds.  Water-fowl  of  every  description  were 
among  them,  from  the  albatross  to  the  penguin,  and  all  of 
gigantic  proportions.  Their  cries  were  absolutely  deaf- 
ening, and  some  of  them  had  such  immense,  wide-spreading 
wings,  that  they  covered  the  sloop  completely  as  they  flew 
over.  The  Doctor  thought  himself  a  good  naturalist,  but 
he  found  his  science  greatly  at  fault,  for  many  a  species 
here  was  wholly  unknown  to  any  ornithological  society. 

The  good  little  man  was  equally  nonplussed  when  he 
looked  at  the  water,  for  he  saw  the  most  wonderful  me- 
dusae, some  so  large  that  they  looked  like  little  islands  float- 
ing about  among  Brobdingnagian  sea-weeds.  And  below 
the  surface,  what  a  spectacle  met  the  eye !  Myriads  of  fish 
of  every  species ;  young  manati  at  play  with  each  other ; 
narwhals  with  their  one  strong  weapon  of  defense,  like 
the  horn  of  a  unicorn,  chasing  the  timid  seals;  whales  of 
every  tribe,  spouting  out  columns  of  water  and  mucilage, 
and  filling  the  air  with  a  peculiar  whizzing  noise ;  dolphins, 
seals,  and  walruses;  sea-dogs  and  sea-horses,  sea-bears  and 
sea-elephants,  quietly  browsing  on  submarine  pastures ;  and 
the  Doctor  could  gaze  at  them  all  as  easily  and  clearly  as  if 
they  were  in  glass  tanks  in  the  Zoological  Gardens. 

There  was  a  strange  supernatural  purity  about  the  at- 
mosphere. It  seemed  charged  to  overflowing  with  oxygen, 
and  had  a  marvelous  power  of  exhilaration,  producing  an 
almost  intoxicating  effect  on  the  brain. 

Towards  evening  Hatteras  and  his  companions  lost 
sight  of  the  coast.  Night  came  on,  though  the  sun  re- 
mained just  above  the  horizon;  it  had  the  same  influence 
on  animated  nature  as  in  temperate  zones.  Birds,  rish, 
and  all  the  cetacea  disappeared,  and  perfect  silence  pre- 
vailed. 

Since  the  departure  from  Altamont  Harbor,  the  sloop 


104  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

had  made  one  degree  farther  north.  The  next  day  brought 
no  signs  of  land ;  there  was  not  even  a  speck  on  the  horizon. 
The  wind  was  still  favorable,  and  the  sea  pretty  calm. 
The  birds  and  fishes  returned  as  numerously  as  on  the  pre- 
ceding day,  and  the  Doctor,  leaning  over  the  side  of  the 
vessel,  could  see  the  whales  and  the  dolphins,  and  all  the 
rest  of  the  monsters  of  the  deep,  gradually  coming  up  from 
the  clear  depths  below.  On  the  surface,  far  as  the  eye 
could  reach,  nothing  was  visible  except  a  solitary  iceberg 
here  and  there,  and  a  few  scattered  floes. 

Indeed,  but  little  ice  was  met  with  anywhere.  The 
sloop  was  ten  degrees  above  the  point  of  greatest  cold,  and 
consequently  in  the  same  temperature  as  Baffin's  Bay  and 
Disko.  It  was  therefore  not  astonishing  that  the  sea 
should  be  open  in  these  summer  months. 

This  is  a  fact  of  great  practical  value,  for  if  ever  the 
whalers  can  penetrate  north  as  far  as  the  Polar  Basin,  they 
may  be  sure  of  an  immediate  cargo,  as  this  part  of  the 
ocean  seems  the  general  reservoir  of  whales  and  seals,  and 
every  marine  species. 

The  day  wore  on,  but  still  nothing  appeared  on  the 
horizon.  Hatteras  never  left  the  prow  of  the  ship,  but 
stood,  glass  in  hand,  eagerly  gazing  into  the  distance  with 
anxious,  questioning  eyes,  and  seeking  to  discover,  in  the 
color  of  the  water,  the  shape  of  the  waves,  and  the  breath 
of  the  wind,  indications  of  approaching  land. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

GETTING  NEAR  THE  POLE 

Hour  after  hour  passed  away,  and  still  Hatteras  per- 
severed in  his  weary  watch,  though  his  hopes  appeared 
doomed  to  disappointment. 

At  length,  about  six  in  the  evening,  a  dim,  hazy,  shape- 
less sort  of  mist  seemed  to  rise  far  away  between  sea  and 
sky.  It  was  not  a  cloud,  for  it  was  constantly  vanishing, 
and  then  reappearing  next  minute. 

Hatteras  was  the  first  to  notice  this  peculiar  phenomenon ; 
but  after  an  hour's  scrutiny  through  his  telescope,  he  could 
make  nothing  of  it. 

All  at  once,  however,  some  sure  indication  met  his  eye, 


GETTING  NEAR   THE   POLE  105 

and  stretching  out  his  arm  to  the  horizon,  he  shouted,  in  a 
clear  ringing  voice: 

"Land  Hand!" 

His  words  produced  an  electrical  effect  on  his  compan- 
ions, and  every  man  rushed  to  his  side. 

"  I  see  it,  I  see  it,"  said  Clawbonny. 

"  Yes,  yes,  so  do  I !  "  exclaimed  Johnson. 

"  It  is  a  cloud,"  said  Altamont. 

"Land!  land!"  repeated  Hatteras,  in  tones  of  absolute 
conviction. 

Even  while  he  spoke  the  appearance  vanished,  and  when 
it  returned  again  the  Doctor  fancied  he  caught  a  gleam  of 
light  about  the  smoke  for  an  instant. 

"  It  is  a  volcano !  "  he  exclaimed. 

"  A  volcano  ?  "  repeated  Altamont. 

"  Undoubtedly." 

"  In  so  high  a  latitude  ?  " 

"  Why  not  ?  Is  not  Iceland  a  volcanic  island — indeed, 
almost  made  of  volcanoes,  one  might  say?" 

"  Well,  has  not  our  famous  countryman,  James  Ross, 
affirmed  the  existence  of  two  active  volcanoes,  the  Erebus 
and  the  Terror,  on  the  Southern  Continent,  in  longitude 
1700  and  latitude  780  ?  Why,  then,  should  not  volcanoes 
be  found  near  the  North  Pole?  " 

"  It  is  possible,  certainly,"  'replied  Altamont. 

"Ah,  now  I  see  it  distinctly,"  exclaimed  the  Doctor. 
*'  It  is  a  volcano !  " 

"  Let  us  make  right  for  it,  then,"  said  Hatteras. 

It  was  impossible  longer  to  doubt  the  proximity  of  the 
coast.  In  twenty-four  hours,  probably,  the  bold  navigators 
might  hope  to  set  foot  on  its  untrodden  soil.  But  strange 
as  it  was,  now  that  they  were  so  near  the  goal  of  their  voy- 
age, no  one  showed  the  joy  which  might  have  been  ex- 
pected. Each  man  sat  silent,  absorbed  in  his  own  thoughts, 
wondering  what  sort  of  place  this  Pole  must  be.  The  birds 
seemed  to  shun  it,  for  though  it  was  evening,  they  were  all 
flying  towards  the  south  with  outspread  wings.  Was  it, 
then,  so  inhospitable,  that  not  so  much  as  a  sea-gull  or  a 
ptarmigan  could  find  a  shelter?  The  fish,  too,  even  the 
large  cetacea,  were  hastening  away  through  the  transparent 
waters.  What  could  cause  this  feeling  either  of  repulsion 
or  terror? 


io6~  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

At  last  sleep  overcame  the  tired  men,  and  one  after  an- 
other dropped  off,  leaving  Hatteras  to  keep  watch. 

He  took  the  helm,  and  tried  his  best  not  to  close  his 
eyes,  for  he  grudged  losing  precious  time ;  but  the  slow  mo- 
tion of  the  vessel  rocked  him  into  a  state  of  such  irresis- 
tible somnolence  that,  in  spite  of  himself,  he  was  soon,  like 
his  companions,  locked  fast  in  deep  slumber.  He  began  to 
dream,  and  imagination  brought  back  all  the  scenes  of  his 
past  life.  He  dreamed  of  his  ship,  the  Forward,  and  of 
the  traitors  that  had  burned  it.  Again  he  felt  all  the  ag- 
onies of  disappointment  and  failure,  and  forgot  his  actual 
situation.  Then  the  scene  changed,  and  he  saw  himself  at 
the  Pole  unfurling  the  Union  Jack! 

While  memory  and  fancy  were  thus  busied,  an  enormous 
cloud  of  an  olive  tinge  had  begun  to  darken  sea  and  sky. 
A  hurricane  was  at  hand.  The  first  blast  of  the  tempest 
roused  the  captain  and  his  companions,  and  they  were  on 
their  feet  in  an  instant,  ready  to  meet  it.  The  sea  had  risen 
tremendously,  and  the  ship  was  tossing  violently  up  and 
down  on  the  billows.  Hatteras  took  the  helm  again,  and 
kept  a  firm  hold  of  it,  while  Johnson  and  Bell  baled  out  the 
water  which  was  constantly  dashing  over  the  ship. 

It  was  a  difficult  matter  to  preserve  the  right  course,  for 
the  thick  fog  made  it  impossible  to  see  more  than  a  few 
yards  off. 

This  sudden  tempest  might  well  seem  to  such  excited 
men,  a  stern  prohibition  against  further  approach  to  the 
Pole;  but  it  needed  but  a  glance  at  their  resolute  faces  to 
know  that  they  would  neither  yield  to  winds  nor  waves, 
but  go  right  on  to  the  end. 

For  a  whole  day  the  struggle  lasted,  death  threatening 
them  each  moment;  but  about  six  in  the  evening,  just  as 
the  fury  of  the  waves  seemed  at  its  highest  pitch,  there 
came  a  sudden  calm.  The  wind  was  stilled  as  if  miracu- 
lously, and  the  sea  became  smooth  as  glass. 

Then  came  a  most  extraordinary  inexplicable  phenome- 
non. 

The  fog,  without  dispersing,  became  strangely  luminous, 
and  the  sloop  sailed  along  in  a  zone  of  electric  light.  Mast, 
sail,  and  rigging  appeared  penciled  in  black  against  the 
phosphorescent  sky  with  wondrous  distinctness.  The  men 
were  bathed  in  light,  and  their  faces  shone  with  a  fiery  glow. 


GETTING  NEAR   THE   POLE  107 

"  The  volcano !  "  exclaimed  Hatteras. 

"  Is  it  possible  ?  "  said  Bell. 

"No,  no!"  replied  Clawbonny.  ".We  should  be  suffo- 
cated with  its  flames  so  near." 

"  Perhaps  it  is  the  reflection,"  suggested  Altamont. 

"  Not  that  much  even,  for  then  we  must  be  near  land, 
and  in  that  case  we  should  hear  the  noise  of  the  eruption." 

"  What  is  it,  then?  "  asked  the  captain. 

"  It  is  a  cosmical  phenomenon,"  replied  the  Doctor,  "  sel- 
dom met  hitherto.  If  we  go  on,  we  shall  soon  get  out 
of  our  luminous  sphere  and  be  back  in  the  darkness  and 
tempest  again." 

"  Well,  let's  go  on,  come  what  may,"  said  Hatteras. 

The  Doctor  was  right.  Gradually  the  fog  began  to  lose 
its  light  and  then  its  transparency,  and  the  howling  wind 
was  heard  not  far  off.  A  few  minutes  more,  and  the  little 
vessel  was  caught  in  a  violent  squall,  and  swept  back  into 
the  cyclone. 

But  the  hurricane  had  fortunately  turned  a  point  to- 
wards the  south,  and  left  the  vessel  free  to  run  before  the 
wind  straight  towards  the  Pole.  There  was  imminent  dan- 
ger of  her  sinking,  for  she  sped  along  at  frenzied  speed, 
and  any  sudden  collision  with  rock  or  iceberg  must  have 
inevitably  dashed  her  to  pieces. 

But  not  a  man  on  board  counseled  prudence.  They  were 
intoxicated  with  the  danger,  and  no  speed  could  be  quick 
enough  to  satisfy  their  longing  impatience  to  reach  the 
unknown. 

At  last  they  began  evidently  to  near  the  coast.  Strange 
symptoms  were  manifest  in  the  air;  the  fog  suddenly  rent 
like  a  curtain  torn  by  the  wind;  and  for  an  instant,  like  a 
flash  of  lightning,  an  immense  column  of  flame  was  seen 
on  the  horizon. 

"  The  volcano !  the  volcano !  "  was  the  simultaneous  ex- 
clamation. 

But  the  words  had  hardly  passed  their  lips  before  the 
fantastic  vision  had  vanished.  The  wind  suddenly  changed 
to  the  southeast,  and  drove  the  ship  back  again  from  the 
land. 

"  Confound  it!  "  said  Hatteras;  "  we  weren  t  three  miles 
from  the  coast. 

However,  resistance  was  impossible.     All  that  could  be 


108  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

done  was  to  keep  tacking;  but  every  few  minutes  the  little 
sloop  would  be  thrown  on  her  side,  though  she  righted 
herself  again  immediately,  obedient  to  the  helm. 

As  Hatteras  stood  with  disheveled  hair,  grasping  the 
helm  as  if  welded  to  his  hand,  he  seemed  the  animating 
soul  of  the  ship. 

All  at  once  a  fearful  sight  met  his  gaze. 

Scarcely  twenty  yards  in  front  was  a  great  block  of  ice 
coming  right  towards  them,  mounting  and  falling  on  the 
stormy  billows,  ready  to  overturn  at  any  moment  and  crush 
them  in  its  descent. 

But  this  was  not  the  only  danger  that  threatened  the 
bold  navigators.  The  iceberg  was  packed  with  white  bears, 
huddling  close  together,  and  evidently  beside  themselves 
with  terror. 

The  iceberg  made  frightful  lurches,  sometimes  inclin- 
ing at  such  a  sharp  angle  that  the  animals  rolled  pell-mell 
over  each  other  and  set  up  a  loud  growling,  which  mingled 
with  the  roar  of  the  elements  and  made  a  terrible  concert. 

For  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  which  seemed  a  whole  century, 
the  sloop  sailed  on  in  this  formidable  company,  sometimes 
a  few  yards  distant  and  sometimes  near  enough  to  touch. 
The  Greenland  dogs  trembled  for  fear,  but  Duk  was  quite 
imperturbable.  At  last  the  iceberg  lost  ground,  and  got 
driven  by  the  wind  farther  and  farther  away  till  it  dis- 
appeared in  the  fog,  only  at  intervals  betraying  its  pres- 
ence by  the  ominous  growls  of  its  equipage. 
_  The  storm  now  burst  forth  with  redoubled  fury.  The 
little  bark  was  lifted  bodily  out  of  the  water,  and  whirled 
round  and  round  with  the  most  frightful  rapidity.  Mast 
and  sail  were  torn  off,  and  went  flying  away  through  the 
darkness,  like  some  large  white  bird.  A  whirlpool  began  to 
form  among  the  waves,  drawing  down  the  ship  gradually 
by  its  irresistible  suction.  Deeper  and  deeper  she  sank, 
whizzing  round  at  such  tremendous  speed  that,  to  the  poor 
fellows  on  board,  the  water  seemed  motionless.  All  five 
men  stood  erect,  gazing  at  each  other  in  speechless  terror. 
But  suddenly  the  ship  rose  perpendicularly,  her  prow  went 
above  the  edge  of  the  vortex,  and  getting  out  of  the  center 
of  attraction  by  her  own  velocity,  she  escaped  at  a  tangent 
from  the  circumference,  and  was  thrown  far  beyond,  swift 
as  a  ball  from  a  cannon's  mouth. 


GETTING   NEAR   THE   POLE  109 

Altamont,  the  Doctor,  Johnson,  and  Bell  were  pitched 
flat  on  the  planks.  When  they  got  up,  Hatteras  had  dis- 
appeared ! 

It  was  two  o'clock  in  the  morning. 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

THE  ENGLISH   FLAG 

For  a  few  seconds  they  seemed  stupefied,  and  then  a  cry 
of  "  Hatteras !  "  broke  from  every  lip. 

On  all  sides,  nothing  was  visible  but  the  tempestuous 
ocean.  Duk  barked  desperately,  and  Bell  could  hardly  keep 
him  from  leaping  into  the  waves. 

"  Take  the  helm,  Altamont,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  and  let 
us  try  our  utmost  to  find  our  poor  captain." 

Johnson  and  Bell  seized  the  oars,  and  rowed  about  for 
more  than  an  hour;  but  their  search  was  vain — Hatteras 
was  lost! 

Lost !  and  so  near  the  Pole,  just  as  he  had  caught  sight 
of  the  goal ! 

The  Doctor  called,  and  shouted,  and  fired  signals,  and 
Duk  made  piteous  lamentations ;  but  there  was  no  response. 
Clawbonny  could  bear  up  no  longer;  he  buried  his  head  in 
his  hands,  and  fairly  wept  aloud. 

At  such  a  distance  from  the  coast  it  was  impossible  Hat- 
teras could  reach  it  alive,  without  an  oar  or  even  so  much 
as  a  spar  to  help  him;  if  ever  he  touched  the  haven  of  his 
desire,  it  would  be  as  a  swollen,  mutilated  corpse. 

Longer  search  was  useless,  and  nothing  remained  but 
to  resume  the  route  north.  The  tempest  was  dying  out, 
and  about  five  in  the  morning  on  the  nth  of  July,  the  wind 
fell,  and  the  sea  gradually  became  calm.  The  sky  recovered 
its  polar  clearness,  and  less  than  three  miles  away  the  land 
appeared  in  all  its  grandeur. 

The  new  continent  was  only  an  island,  or  rather  a  vol- 
cano, fixed  like  a  lighthouse  on  the  North  Pole  of  the  world. 

The  mountain  was  in  full  activity,  pouring  out  a  mass 
of  burning  stones  and  glowing  rock.  At  every  fresh  erup- 
tion there  was  a  convulsive  heaving  within,  as  if  some 
mighty  giant  were  respiring,  and  the  masses  ejected  were 
.thrown  up  high  into  the  air  amidst  jets  of  bright  flame, 


up  THE   DESERT    OF   ICE 

streams  of  lava  rolling  down  the  sides  in  impetuous  tor- 
rents. _  In  one  part,  serpents  of  fire, seemed  writhing  and 
wriggling  amongst  smoking  rocks,  and  in  another  the  glow- 
ing liquid  fell  in  cascades,  in  the  midst  of  purple  vapor, 
into  a  river  of  fire  below,  formed  of  a  thousand  igneous 
streams,  which  emptied  itself  into  the  sea,  the  waters  hiss- 
ing and  seething  like  a  boiling  cauldron. 

Apparently  there  was  only  one  crater  to  the  volcano,  out 
of  which  the  columns  of  fire  issued,  streaked  with  forked 
lightning.  Electricity  seemed  to  have  something  to  do  with 
this  magnificent  panorama. 

Above  the  panting  flames  waved  an  immense  plume- 
shaped  cloud  of  smoke,  red  at  its  base  and  black  at  its 
summit.  It  rose  with  incomparable  majesty,  and  unrolled 
in  thick  volumes. 

The  sky  was  ash-color  to  a  great  height,  and  it  was  evi- 
dent that  the  darkness  that  had  prevailed  while  the  tem- 
pest lasted,  which  had  seemed  quite  inexplicable  to  the 
Doctor,  was  owing  to  the  columns  of  cinders  overspreading 
the  sun  like  a  thick  curtain.  He  remembered  a  similar 
phenomenon  which  occurred  in  the  Barbadoes,  where  the 
whole  island  was  plunged  in  profound  obscurity  by  the 
mass  of  cinders  ejected  from  the  crater  of  Isle  St.  Vincent. 

This  enormous  ignivomous  rock  in  the  middle  of  the 
sea  was  six  thousand  feet  high,  just  about  the  altitude  of 
Hecla. 

It  seemed  to  rise  gradually  out  of  the  water  as  the  boat 
got  nearer.  There  was  no  trace  of  vegetation,  indeed  there 
was  no  shore ;  the  rock  ran  straight  down  to  the  sea. 

"  Can  we  land?  "  said  the  Doctor. 

"  The  wind  is  carrying  us  right  to  it,"  said  Altamont. 

"  But  I  don't  see  an  inch  of  land  to  set  our  foot  upon." 

"It  seems  so  at  this  distance,"  said  Johnson;  "but  we 
shall  be  sure  to  find  some  place  to  run  in  our  boat  at, 
and  that  is  all  we  want." 

"  Let  us  go,  then,"  said  Clawbonny,  dejectedly. 

He  had  no  heart  now  for  anything.  The  North  Pole  was 
indeed  before  his  eyes,  but  not  the  man  who  had  discovered 
it. 

As  they  got  nearer  the  island,  which  was  not  more  than 
eight  or  ten  miles  in  circumference,  the  navigators  noticed 
a  tiny  fiord,  just  large  enough  to  harbor  their  boat,  and 


THE   ENGLISH   FLAG  in 

made  towards  it  immediately.  They  feared  their  captain's 
dead  body  would  meet  their  eyes  on  the  coast,  and  yet 
it  seemed  difficult  for  a  corpse  to  lie  on  it,  for  there  was  no 
shore,  and  the  sea  broke  on  steep  rocks,  which  were  covered 
with  cinders  above  watermark. 

At  last  the  little  sloop  glided  gently  into  the  narrow 
opening  between  two  sandbanks  just  visible  above  the  water, 
where  she  would  be  safe  from  the  violence  of  the  breakers ; 
but  before  she  could  be  moored,  Duk  began  howling  and 
barking  again  in  the  most  piteous  manner,  as  if  calling  on 
the  cruel  sea  and  stony  rocks  to  yield  up  his  lost  master. 
The  Doctor  tried  to  calm  him  by  caresses,  but  in  vain. 
The  faithful  beast,  as  if  he  would  represent  the  captain, 
sprang  on  shore  with  a  tremendous  bound,  sending  a  cloud 
of  cinders  after  him. 

"  Duk!  Duk!  "  called  Clawbonny. 

But  Duk  had  already  disappeared. 

After  the  sloop  was  made  fast,  they  all  got  out  and  went 
after  him.  Altamont  was  just  going  to  climb  to  the  top 
of  a  pile  of  stones,  when  the  Doctor  exclaimed,  "  Listen ! 
Listen!" 

Duk  was  barking  vehemently  some  distance  off,  but  his 
bark  seemed  full  of  grief  rather  than  fury. 

"  Has  he  come  on  the  track  of  some  animal,  do  you 
think  ?  "  asked  Johnson. 

"No,  no!"  said  Clawbonny,  shuddering.  "His  bark 
is  too  sorrowful;  it  is  the  dog's  tear.  He  has  found  the 
body  of  Hatteras." 

They  all  four  rushed  forward,  in  spite  of  the  blinding 
cinder-dust,  and  came  to  the  far  end  of  a  fiord)  where  they 
discovered  the  dog  barking  round  a  corpse  wrapped  in 
the  British  flag ! 

"  Hatteras !  Hatteras !  "  cried  the  Doctor,  throwing  him- 
self on  the  body  of  his  friend.  But  next  minute  he  started 
up  with  an  indescribable  cry,  and  shouted,  "  Alive !  alive !  " 

"Yes!"  said  a  feeble  voice,  "yes,  alive  at  the  North 
Pole,  on  Queen's  Island." 

"Hurrah  for  England!"  shouted  all  with  one  accord. 

"And  for  America!"  added  Clawbonny,  holding  out 
one  hand  to  Hatteras  and  the  other  to  Altamont. 

Duk  was  not  behind  with  his  hurrah,  which  was  worth 
quite  as  much  as  the  others. 


H2  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

snF?r«  f6W  minutes  the  Joy  of  recovery  of  their  captain 
tilled  all  their  hearts,  and  the  poor  fellows  could  not  restrain 
their  tears. 

The  Doctor  found,  on  examination,  that  he  was  not 
seriously  hurt.  The  wind  threw  him  on  the  coast  where 
landing  was  perilous  work,  but,  after  being  driven  back 
more  than  once  into  the  sea,  the  hardy  sailor  had  managed 
to  scramble  onto  a  rock,  and  gradually  to  hoist  himself 
above  the  waves. 

Then  he  must  have  become  insensible,  for  he  remem- 
bered nothing  more  except  rolling  himself  in  his  flag.  He 
only  awoke  to  consciousness  with  the  loud  barking  and 
caresses  of  his  faithful  Duk. 

After  a  little  Hatteras  was  able  to  stand  up,  supported 
by  the  Doctor,  and  tried  to  get  back  to  the  sloop. 
He  kept  exclaiming,  "  The  Pole !  the  North  Pole ! " 
"  You  are  happy  now  ?  "  said  his  friend. 
"Yes,  happy!    And  are  not  you?    Isn't  it  joy  to  find 
yourself  here!    The  ground  we  tread  is  round  the  Pole! 
The  air  we  breathe  is  the  air  that  blows  round  the  Pole! 
The  sea  we  have  crossed  is  the  sea  which  washes  the  Pole ! 
Oh!  the  North  Pole!  the  North  Pole!  " 

He  had  became  quite  delirious  with  excitement,  and 
fever  burned  in  his  veins.  His  eyes  shone  with  unnatural 
brilliancy,  and  his  brain  seemed  on  fire.  Perfect  rest  was 
what  he  most  needed,  for  the  Doctor  found  it  impossible 
to  quiet  him. 

A  place  of  encampment  must  therefore  be  fixed  upon 
immediately. 

Altamont  speedily  discovered  a  grotto  composed  of  rocks 
which  had  so  fallen  as  to  form  a  sort  of  cave.  Johnson 
and  Bell  carried  in  provisions  and  gave  the  dogs  their 
liberty. 

About  eleven  o'clock,  breakfast,  or  rather  dinner,  was 
ready,  consisting  of  pemmican,  salt  meat,  and  smoking-hot 
tea  and  coffee. 

But  Hatteras  would  do  nothing  till  the  exact  position 
of  the  island  was  ascertained;  so  the  Doctor  and  Altamont 
set  to  work  with  their  instruments,  and  found  that  the 
exact  latitude  of  the  grotto  was  890  59'  15".  The  longitude 
was  of  little  importance,  for  all  the  meridians  blended  a  few 
hundred  feet  higher. 
V.  in  Verne 


THE   ENGLISH   FLAG  113 

The  900  of  latitude  was  then  only  about  three-quarters 
of  a  mile  off,  or  just  about  the  summit  of  the  volcano. 

When  the  result  was  communicated  to.  Hatteras,  he  de- 
sired that  a  formal  document  might  be  drawn  up  to  attest 
the  fact,  and  two  copies  made,  one  of  which  should  be  de- 
posited on  a  cairn  on  the  island. 

Clawbonny  was  the  scribe,  and  indited  the  following 
document,  a  copy  of  which  is  now  among  the  archives  of 
the  Royal  Geographical  Society  of  London: — 

"On  this  nth  day  of  July,  1861,  in  North  latitude 
890  59'  15"  was  discovered  Queen's  Island  at  the  North 
Pole,  by  Captain  Hatteras,  Commander  of  the  brig  For- 
ward of  Liverpool,  who  signs  this,  as  also  all  his  com- 
panions. 

"  Whoever  may  find  this  document  is  requested  to  for- 
ward it  to  the  Admiralty. 

"(Signed)  John  Hatteras,  Commander  of 

the  Forward. 
"Dr.  Clawbonny. 
"Altamont,    Commander   of   the 

Porpoise. 
"Johnson,  Boatswain. 
"  Bell,  Carpenter." 

"And  now,  friends,  come  to  table,"  said  the  Doctor, 
merrily. 

Coming  to  table  was  just  squatting  on  the  ground. 

"  But  who,"  said  Clawbonny,  "  would  not  give  all  the 
tables  and  dining-rooms  in  the  world  to  dine  at  890  59'  and 
15"  N.  lat?" 

It  was  an  exciting  occasion,  this  first  meal  at  the  Pole! 
What  neither  ancients  nor  moderns,  neither  Europeans,  nor 
Americans,  nor  Asiatics  had  been  able  to  accomplish  was 
now  achieved,  and  all  past  sufferings  and  perils  were  for- 
gotten in  the  glow  of  success. 

"  But,  after  all,"  said  Johnson,  after  toasts  to  Hatteras 
and  the  North  Pole  had  been  enthusiastically  drunk,  "  what 
is  there  so  very  special  about  the  North  Pole?  Will  you 
tell  me,  Mr.  Clawbonny?  " 

"Just  this,  my  good  Johnson.     It  is  the  only  point  of 


ii4  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

the  globe  that  is  motionless;  all  the  other  points  are  re- 
volving with  extreme  rapidity." 

"  But  I  don't  see  that  we  are  any  more  motionless  here 
than  at  Liverpool." 

"  Because  in  both  cases  you  are  a  party  concerned,  both 
in  the  motion  and  the  rest ;  but  the  fact  is  certain." 

Clawbonny  then  went  on  to  describe  the  diurnal  and 
annual  motions  of  the  earth — the  one  round  its  own  axis, 
the  extremities  of  which  are  the  poles,  which  is  accom- 
plished in  twenty-four  hours,  and  the  other  round  the  sun, 
which  takes  a  whole  year. 

Bell  and  Johnson  listened  half  incredulously,  and  couldn't 
see  why  the  earth  could  not  have  been  allowed  to  keep 
still,  till  Altamont  informed  them  that  they  would  then 
have  had  neither  day  nor  night,  nor  spring,  summer, 
autumn,  and  winter. 

"  Ay,  and  worse  still,"  said  Clawbonny,  "  if  the  motion 
chanced  to  be  interrupted,  we  should  fall  right  into  the  sun 
in  sixty-four  and  a  half  days." 

"What!  take  sixty- four  and  a  half  days  to  fall?"  ex- 
claimed Johnson. 

"  Yes,  we  are  ninety-five  millions  of  miles  off.  But 
when  I  say  the  Pole  is  motionless,  it  is  not  strictly  true; 
it  is  only  so  in  comparison  with  the  rest  of  the  globe,  for 
it  has  a  certain  movement  of  its  own,  and  completes  a  circle 
in  about  twenty-six  thousand  years.  This  comes  from  the 
precession  of  the  equinoxes." 

A  long  and  learned  talk  was  started  on  this  subject  be- 
tween Altamont  and  the  Doctor,  simplified,  however,  as 
much  as  possible,  for  the  benefit  of  Bell  and  Johnson. 

Hatteras  took  no  part  in  it,  and  even  when  they  went 
on  to  speculate  about  the  earth's  center,  and  discussed 
several  of  the  theories  that  had  been  advanced  respecting 
it,  he  seemed  not  to  hear;  it  was  evident  his  thoughts  were 
far  away. 

Among  other  opinions  put  forth  was  one  in  our  own 
days,  which  greatly  excited  Altamont's  surprise.  It  was  held 
that  there  was  an  immense  opening  at  the  poles  which  led 
into  the  heart  of  the  earth,  and  that  it  was  out  of  the  open- 
ing that  the  light  of  the  Aurora  Borealis  streamed.  This 
was  gravely  stated,  and  Captain  Symmes,  a  countryman  of 
our  own,  actually  proposed  that  Sir  Humphrey  Davy,  Hum- 


THE   ENGLISH   FLAG  115 

boldt,  and  Arago  should  undertake  an  expedition  through 
it,  but  they  refused. 

"  And  quite  right  too,"  said  Altamont. 

"So  say  I;  but  you  see,  my  friends,  what  absurdities 
imagination  has  conjured  up  about  those  regions,  and  how, 
sooner  or  later,  the  simple  reality  comes  to  light." 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

MOUNT  HATTERAS 

After  this  conversation  they  all  made  themselves  as 
comfortable  as  they  could,  and  lay  down  to  sleep. 

All,  except  Hatteras;  and  why  could  this  extraordinary 
man  not  sleep  like  the  others  ?  Was  not  the  purpose  of  his 
life _ attained  now?  Had  he  not  realized  his  most  daring 
project?  Why  could  he  not  rest?  Indeed,  might  not  one 
have  supposed  that,  after  the  strain  his  nervous  system  had 
undergone,  he  would  long  for  rest  ? 

But  no,  he  grew  more  and  more  excited,  and  it  was 
not  the  thought  of  returning  that  so  affected  him.  Was  he 
bent  on  going  further  still?  Had  his  passion  for  travel 
no  limits?  Was  the  world  too  small  for  him  now  he  had 
circumnavigated  it? 

Whatever  might  be  the  cause,  he  could  not  sleep;  yet 
this  first  night  at  the  Pole  was  clear  and  calm.  The  isle 
was  absolutely  uninhabited — not  a  bird  was  to  be  seen  in 
this  burning  atmosphere,  not  an  animal  on  these  scoriae- 
covered  rocks,  not  a  fish  in  these  seething  waters. 

Next  morning,  when  Altamont  and  the  others  awoke, 
Hatteras  was  gone.  Feeling  uneasy  at  his  absence,  they 
hurried  out  of  the  grotto  in  search  of  him.  There  he  was 
standing  on  a  rock,  gazing  fixedly  at  the  top  of  the  moun- 
tain. His  instruments  were  in  his  hand,  and  he  was  evi- 
dently calculating  the  exact  longitude  and  latitude. 

The  Doctor  went  towards  him  and  spoke,  but  it  was 
long  before  he  could  rouse  him  from  his  absorbing  contem- 
plations. At  last  the  captain  seemed  to  understand,  and 
Clawbonny  said,  while  he  examined  him  with  a  keen  scrutin- 
izing glance : 

"  Let  us  go  round  the  island.  Here  we  are,  all  ready 
for  our  last  excursion." 


n6  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

"  The  last !  "  repeated  Hatteras,  as  if  in  a  dream.  "  Yes ! 
the  last  truly;  but,"  he  added,  with  more  animation,  "the 
most  wonderful." 

He  pressed  both  hands  on  his  brow  as  he  spoke,  as  if 
to  calm  the  inward  tumult. 

Just  then  Altamont  and  the  others  came  up,  and  their 
appearance  seemed  to  dispel  the  hallucinations  under  which 
he  was  laboring. 

"  My  friends,"  he  said,  in  a  voice  full  of  emotion, 
"  thanks  for  your  courage,  thanks  for  your  perseverance, 
thanks  for  your  superhuman  efforts,  through  which  we 
are  permitted  to  set  our  feet  on  this  soil." 

"  Captain,"  said  Johnson,  "  we  have  only  obeyed  orders; 
to  you  alone  belongs  the  honor." 

"  No,  no ! "  exclaimed  Hatteras,  with  a  violent  outburst 
of  emotion,  "  to  all  of  you  as  much  as  to  me !  To  Alta- 
mont as  much  as  any  of  us,  as  much  as  the  Doctor  himself ! 
Oh,  let  my  heart  break  in  your  hands,  it  cannot  contain  its 
joy  and  gratitude  any  longer." 

He  grasped  the  hands  of  his  brave  companions  as  he 
spoke,  and  paced  up  and  down  as  if  he  had  lost  all  self- 
control. 

"  We  have  only  done  our  duty  as  Englishmen,"  said  Bell. 

"  And  as  friends,"  added  Clawbonny. 

"  Yes ;  but  all  did  not  do  it,"  replied  Hatteras ;  "  some 
gave  way.  However,  we  must  pardon  them — pardon  both 
the  traitors  and  those  who  were  led  away  by  them.  Poor 
fellows !    I  forgive  them.    You  hear  me,  Doctor  ?  " 

"  Yes,"  replied  Clawbonny,  beginning  to  be  seriously  un- 
easy at  his  friend's  excitement. 

"  I  have  no  wish,  therefore,"  continued  the  captain,  "  that 
they  should  lose  the  little  fortune  they  came  so  far  to  seek. 
No,  the  original  agreement  is  to  remain  unaltered,  and 
they  shall  be  rich — if  ever  they  see  England  again." 

It  would  have  been  difficult  not  to  have  been  touched 
by  the  pathetic  tone  of  voice  in  which  Hatteras  said  this. 

"But,  captain,"  interrupted  Johnson,  trying  to  joke, 
"  one  would  think  you  were  making  your  will !  " 

"  Perhaps  I  am,"  said  Hatteras  gravely. 

"  And  yet  you  have  a  long  bright  career  of  glory  before 
you ! " 

"  Who  knows  ?  "  was  the  reply. 


MOUNT   HATTERAS  117 

No  one  answered,  and  the  Doctor  did  not  dare  to  guess 
his  meaning;  but  Hatteras  soon  made  them  understand  it, 
for  presently  he  said,  in  a  hurried,  agitated  manner,  as  if 
he  could  scarcely  command  himself : 

"  Friends,  listen  to  me.  We  have  done  much  already, 
but  much  yet  remains  to  be  done." 

His  companions  heard  him  with  profound  astonishment. 

"Yes,"  he  resumed,  "we  are  close  to  the  Pole,  but  we 
are  not  on  it." 

"  How  do  you  make  that  out?  "  said  Altamont. 

"  Yes,"  replied  Hatteras,  with  vehemence,  "  I  said  an 
Englishman  should  plant  his  foot  on  the  Pole  of  the  world! 
I  said  it,  and  an  Englishman  shall." 

"  What !  "  cried  Clawbonny. 

"  We  are  still  45"  from  the  unknown  point,"  resumed 
Hatteras,  with  increasing  animation,  "  and  to  that  point  I 
shall  go." 

"  But  it  is  on  the  summit  of  the  volcano/'  said  the  Doc- 
tor. 

"I  shall  go." 

"  It  is  an  inaccessible  cone !  " 

"  I  shall  go." 

*  But  it  is  a  yawning  fiery  crater !  " 

"  I  shall  go." 

The  tone  of  absolute  determination  in  which  Hatteras 
pronounced  these  words  it  is  impossible  to  describe. 

His  friends  were  stupefied,  and  gazed  in  terror  at  the 
blazing  mountain. 

At  last  the  Doctor  recovered  himself,  and  began  to  urge 
and  entreat  Hatteras  to  renounce  his  project.  He  tried 
every  means  his  heart  dictated,  from  humble  supplications 
to  friendly  threats;  but  he  could  gain  nothing — a  sort  of 
frenzy  had  come  over  the  captain,  an  absolute  monomania 
about  the  Pole. 

Nothing  but  violent  measures  would  keep  him  back  from 
destruction,  but  the  Doctor  was  unwilling  to  employ  these 
unless  driven  to  extremity. 

He  trusted,  moreover,  that  physical  impossibilities,  in- 
superable obstacles,  would  bar  his  further  progress,  and 
meantime,  finding  all  protestations  were  useless,  he  simply 
said: 

"  Very  well,  since  you  are  bent  on  it,  we'll  go  too." 


Ii8  THE   DESERT    OF    ICE 

"  Yes,"  replied  Hatteras,  "  half-way  tip  the  mountain, 
but  not  a  step  beyond.  You  know  you  have  to  carry  back 
to  England  the  duplicate  of  the  document  in  the  cairn " 

"  Yes ;  but " 

"  It  is  settled,"  said  Hatteras,  in  an  imperious  tone ;  "  and 
since  the  prayers  of  a  friend  will  not  suffice,  the  captain 
commands." 

The  Doctor  did  not  insist  longer,  and  a  few  minutes 
after  the  little  band  set  out,  accompanied  by  Duk. 

It  was  about  eight  o'clock  when  they  commenced  their 
difficult  ascent;  the  sky  was  splendid,  and  the  thermometer 
stood  at  52 °. 

Hatteras  and  his  dog  went  first,  closely  followed  by  the 
others. 

"  I  am  afraid,"  said  Johnson  to  the  Doctor. 

"  No,  no,  there's  nothing  to  be  afraid  of;  we  are  here." 

This  singular  little  island  appeared  to  be  of  recent  forma- 
tion, and  was  evidently  the  product  of  successive  volcanic 
eruptions.  The  rocks  were  all  lying  loose  on  the  top  of 
each  other,  and  it  was  a  marvel  how  they  preserved  their 
equilibrium.  Strictly  speaking,  the  mountain  was  only  a 
heap  of  stones  thrown  down  from  a  height,  and  the  mass  of 
rocks  which  composed  the  island  had  evidently  come  out 
of  the  bowels  of  the  earth. 

The  earth,  indeed,  may  be  compared  to  a  vast  cauldron 
of  spherical  form,  in  which,  under  the  influence  of  a  central 
fire,  immense  quantities  of  vapors  are  generated,  which 
would  explode  the  globe  but  for  the  safety-valves  outside. 

These  safety-valves  are  volcanoes;  when  one  closes  an- 
other opens ;  and  at  the  Poles,  where  the  crust  of  the  earth 
is  thinner,  owing  to  its  being  flattened,  it  is  not  surprising 
that  a  volcano  should  be  suddenly  formed  by  the  upheaving 
of  some  part  of  the  ocean-bed. 

The  Doctor,  while  following  Hatteras,  was  closely  fol- 
lowing all  the  peculiarities  of  the  island,  and  he  was  further 
confirmed  in  his  opinion  as  to  its  recent  formation  by  the 
absence  of  water.  Had  it  existed  for  centuries,  the  thermal 
springs  would  have  flowed  from  its  bosom. 

As  they  got  higher,  the  ascent  became  more  and  more 
difficult,  for  the  flanks  of  the  mountain  were  almost  per- 
pendicular, and  it  required  the  utmost  care  to  keep  them 
from  falling.     Clouds  of  scoriae  and  ashes  would  whirl 


MOUNT    HATTERAS  119 

round  them  repeatedly,  threatening  them  with  asphyxia,  or 
torrents  of  lava  would  bar  their  passage.  In  parts  where 
these  torrents  ran  horizontally,  the  outside  had  become 
hardened ;  while  underneath  was  the  boiling  lava,  and  every 
step  the  travelers  took  had  first  to  be  tested  with  the  iron- 
tipped  staff  to  avoid  being  suddenly  plunged  into  the  scald- 
ing liquid. 

At  intervals  large  fragments  of  red-hot  rock  were  thrown 
up  from  the  crater,  and  burst  in  the  air  like  bomb-shells, 
scattering  the  debris  to  enormous  distances  in  all  directions. 

Hatteras,  however,  climbed  up  the  steepest  ascents  with 
surprising  agilit}^  disdaining  the  help  of  his  staff. 

He  arrived  before  long  at  a  circular  rock,  a  sort  of 
plateau  about  ten  feet  wide.  A  river  of  boiling  lava  sur- 
rounded it  except  in  one  part,  where  it  forked  away  to  a 
higher  rock,  leaving  a  narrow  passage,  through  which  Hat- 
teras fearlessly  passed. 

Here  he  stopped,  and  his  companions  managed  to  rejoin 
him.  He  seemed  to  be  measuring  with  his  eye  the  distance 
he  had  yet  to  get  over.  Horizontally,  he  was  not  more 
than  two  hundred  yards  from  the  top  of  the  crater,  but 
vertically  he  had  nearly  three  times  that  distance  to  traverse. 

The  ascent  had  occupied  three  hours  already.  Hatteras 
showed  no  signs  of  fatigue,  while  the  others  were  almost 
spent. 

The  summit  of  the  volcano  appeared  inaccessible,  and 
the  Doctor  determined  at  any  price  to  prevent  Hatteras 
from  attempting  to  proceed.  He  tried  gentle  means  first, 
but  the  captain's  excitement  was  fast  becoming  delirium. 
During  their  ascent,  symptoms  of  insanity  had  become  more 
and  more  marked,  and  no  one  could  be  surprised  who  knew 
anything  of  his  previous  history. 

"  Hatteras,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  it  is  enough ;  we  cannot 
go  farther !  " 

"  Stop,  then,"  he  replied,  in  a  strangely  altered  voice ; 
"  I  am  going  higher." 

"  No,  it  is  useless ;  you  are  at  the  Pole  already." 

"  No,  no !  higher,  higher !  " 

"  My  friend,  do  you  know  who  is  speaking  to  you  ?  It 
is  I,  Dr.  Clawbonny." 

"  Higher,  higher !  "  repeated  the  madman. 

"  Very  well,  we  shall  not  allow  it — that  is  all." 


120  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

He  had  hardly  uttered  the  words  before  Hatteras,  by  a 
superhuman  effort,  sprang  over  the  boiling  lava,  and  was 
beyond  the  reach  of  his  companions. 

A  cry  of  horror  burst  from  every  lip,  for  they  thought 
the  poor  captain  must  have  perished  in  that  fiery  gulf; 
but  there  he  was  safe  on  the  other  side,  accompanied  by 
his  faithful  Duk,  who  would  not  leave  him. 

He  speedily  disappeared  behind  a  curtain  of  smoke,  and 
they  heard  his  voice  growing  fainter  in  the  distance,  shout- 
ing: 

"  To  the  north !  to  the  north !  to  the  top  of  Mount  Hat- 
teras !    Remember  Mount  Hatteras ! " 

All  pursuit  of  him  was  out  of  the  question ;  it  was  im- 
possible to  leap  across  the  fiery  torrent,  and  equally  im- 
possible to  get  round  it.  Altamont,  indeed,  was  mad  enough 
to  make  an  attempt,  and  v/ould  certainly  have  lost  his  life 
if  the  others  had  not  held  him  back  by  main  force. 

"  Hatteras !  Hatteras ! "  shouted  the  Doctor,  but  no  re- 
sponse was  heard  save  the  faint  bark  of  Duk. 

At  intervals,  however,  a  glimpse  of  him  could  be  caught 
through  the  clouds  of  smoke  and  showers  of  ashes.  Some- 
times his  head,  sometimes  his  arm  appeared ;  then  he  was 
out  of  sight  again,  and  a  few  minutes  later  was  seen  higher 
up  clinging  to  the  rocks.  His  size  constantly  decreased  with 
the  fantastic  rapidity  of  objects  rising  upwards  in  the  air. 
In  half  an  hour  he  was  only  half  his  size. 

The  air  was  full  of  the  deep  rumbling  noise  of  the  vol- 
cano, and  the  mountain  shook  and  trembled.  From  time 
to  time  a  loud  fall  was  heard  behind,  and  the  travelers 
would  see  some  enormous  rock  rebounding  from  the  heights 
to  engulf  itself  in  the  polar  basin  below. 

Hatteras  did  not  even  turn  once  to  look  back,  but  marched 
straight  on,  carrying  his  country's  flag  attached  to  his 
staff,  ffis  terrified  friends  watched  every  movement,  and 
saw  him  gradually  decrease  to  microscopic  dimensions, 
while  Duk  looked  no  larger  than  a  big  rat. 

Then  came  a  moment  of  intense  anxiety,  for  the  wind 
beat  down  on  them  an  immense  sheet  of  flame,  and  they 
could  see  nothing  but  the  red  glare.  A  cry  of  agony  es- 
caped the  Doctor;  but  an  instant  afterwards  Hatteras  re- 
appeared, waving  his  flag. 

For  a  whole  hour  this  fearful  spectacle  went  on— an 


MOUNT   HATTERAS  121 

hour  of  battle  with  unsteady  loose  rocks  and  quagmires 
of  ashes,  where  the  foolhardy  climber  sank  up  to  his 
waist.  Sometimes  they  saw  him  hoist  himself  up  by  lean- 
ing knees  and  loins  against  the  rocks  in  narrow,  intricate 
winding  paths,  and  sometimes  he  would  be  hanging  on  by 
both  hands  to  some  sharp  crag,  swinging  to  and  fro  like  a 
withered  tuft. 

At  last  he  reached  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  the  mouth 
of  the  crater.  Here  the  Doctor  hoped  the  infatuated  man 
would  stop,  at  any  rate,  and  would,  perhaps,  recover  his 
senses,  and  expose  himself  to  no  more  danger  than  the 
descent  involved. 

Once  more  he  shouted :     "  Hatteras !  Hatteras !  " 

There  was  such  a  pathos  of  entreaty  in  his  tone  that  Alta- 
mont  felt  moved  to  his  inmost  soul. 

"I'll  save  him  yet!"  he  exclaimed;  and  before  Claw- 
bonny  could  hinder  him,  he  had  cleared  with  a  bound  the 
torrent  of  fire,  and  was  out  of  sight  among  the  rocks. 

Meantime,  Hatteras  had  mounted  a  rock  which  over- 
hung the  crater,  and  stood  waving  his  flag  amidst  showers 
of  stones  which  rained  down  on  him.  Duk  was  by  his  side ; 
but  the  poor  beast  was  growing  dizzy  in  such  close  prox- 
imity to  the  abyss. 

Hatteras  balanced  his  staff  with  one  hand,  and  with  the 
other  sought  to  find  the  precise  mathematical  point  where 
all  the  meridans  of  the  globe  meet,  the  point  on  which  it 
was  his  sublime  purpose  to  plant  his  foot. 

All  at  once  the  rock  gave  way,  and  he  disappeared.  A 
cry  of  horror  broke  from  his  companions,  and  rang  to  the 
top  of  the  mountain.  Clawbonny  thought  his  friend  had 
perished,  and  lay  buried  for  ever  in  the  depths  of  the  vol- 
cano. A  second — only  a  second,  though  it  seemed  an  age- 
elapsed,  and  there  was  Altamont  and  the  dog  holding  the  ill- 
fated  Hatteras !  Man  and  dog  had  caught  him  at  the  very 
moment  when  he  disappeared  in  the  abyss. 

Hatteras  was  saved!  Saved  in  spite  of  himself;  and 
half-an-hour  later  he  lay  unconscious  in  the  arms  of  his 
despairing  companions. 

When  he  came  to  himself,  the  Doctor  looked  at  him  in 
speechless  anguish,  for  there  was  no  glance  of  recognition 
in  his  eye.  It  was  the  eye  of  a  blind  man,  who  gazes  with- 
out seeing. 


122  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

"  Good  heavens !  "  exclaimed  Johnson,  "  he  is  blind ! " 

"  No !  "  replied  Clawbonny,  "  no !  My  poor  friends,  we 
have  only  saved  the  body  of  Hatteras;  his  soul  is  left  be- 
hind on  the  top  of  the  volcano.    His  reason  is  gone !  " 

"  Insane ! "  exclaimed  Johnson  and  Altamont,  in  con- 
sternation. 

"Insane!"  replied  the  Doctor,  and  the  big  tears  ran 
down  his  cheeks. 


CHAPTER  XXV 

RETURN  SOUTH 

Three  hours  after  this  sad  denouement  of  the  adven- 
tures of  Captain  Hatteras,  the  whole  party  were  back  once 
more  in  the  grotto. 

Clawbonny  was  asked  his  opinion  as  to  what  was  best 
to  be  done. 

"  Well,  friends,"  he  said,  "  we  cannot  stay  longer  in  this 
island;  the  sea  is  open,  and  we  have  enough  provisions. 
We  ought  to  start  at  once,  and  get  back  without  the  least 
delay  to  Fort  Providence,  where  we  must  winter." 

"  That  is  my  opinion,  too,"  said  Altamont.  "  The  wind 
is  favorable,  so  to-morrow  we  will  get  to  sea." 

The  day  passed  in  profound  dejection.  The  insanity  of 
the  captain  was  a  bad  omen,  and  when  they  began  to  talk 
over  the  return  voyage,  their  hearts  failed  them  for  fear. 
They  missed  the  intrepid  spirit  of  their  leader. 

However,  like  brave  men,  they  prepared  to  battle  anew 
with  the  elements  and  with  themselves,  if  ever  they  felt  in- 
clined to  give  way. 

Next  morning  they  made  all  ready  to  sail,  and  brought 
the  tent  and  all  its  belongings  on  board. 

But  before  leaving  these  rocks,  never  to  return,  the  Doc- 
tor carrying  out  the  intentions  of  Hatteras,  had  a  cairn 
erected  on  the  very  spot  where  the  poor  fellow  had  jumped 
ashore.  It  was  made  of  great  blocks  placed  one  on  the 
top  of  the  other,  so  as  to  be  a  landmark  perfectly  visible 
while  the  eruption  of  the  volcano  left  it  undisturbed.  On 
one  of  the  side  stones,  Bell  chiseled  the  simple  inscription : 
John  Hatteras 

The  duplicate  of  the  document  attesting  the  discovery 


RETURN   SOUTH  123 

of  the  North  Pole  was  enclosed  in  a  tinned  iron  cylinder, 
and  deposited  in  the  cairn,  to  remain  a  silent  witness  among 
those  desert  rocks. 

This  done,  the  four  men  and  the  captain,  a  poor  body- 
without  a  soul,  set  out  on  the  return  voyage,  accompanied 
by  the  faithful  Dukr  who  had  become  sad  and  downcast. 
A  new  sail  was  manufactured  out  of  the  tent,  and  about 
ten  o'clock,  the  little  sloop  sailed  out  before  the  wind. 

She  made  a  quick  passage,  finding  abundance  of  open 
water.  It  was  certainly  easier  to  get  away  from  the  Pole 
than  to  get  to  it. 

But  Hatteras  knew  nothing  that  was  passing  around 
him.  He  lay  full  length  in  the  boat,  perfectly  silent,  with 
lifeless  eye  and  folded  arms,  and  Duk  lying  at  his  feet. 
Clawbonny  frequently  addressed  him,  but  could  elicit  no 
reply. 

On  the  15th  they  sighted  Altamont  Harbor,  but  as  the 
sea  was  open  all  along  the  coast,  they  determined  to  go 
round  to  Victoria  Bay  by  water,  instead  of  crossing  New 
America  in  the  sledge. 

The  voyage  was  easy  and  rapid.  In  a  week  they  accom- 
plished what  had  taken  a  fortnight  in  the  sledge,  and  on 
the  23rd  they  cast  anchor  in  Victoria  Bay. 

As  soon  as  the  sloop  was  made  fast,  they  all  hastened  to 
Fort  Providence.  But  what  a  scene  of  devastation  met 
their  eyes!  Doctor's  House,  stores,  powder-magazine, 
fortifications,  all  had  melted  away,  and  the  provisions  had 
been  ransacked  by  devouring  animals. 

The  navigators  had  almost  come  to  the  end  of  their  sup- 
plies, and  had  been  reckoning  on  replenishing  their  stores 
at  Fort  Providence.  The  impossibility  of  wintering  there 
now  was  evident,  and  they  decided  to  get  to  Baffin's  Bay 
by  the  shortest  route.  ((  , 

"  We  have  no  alternative,"  said  Clawbonny.  "  Baffin  s 
Bay  is  not  more  than  six  hundred  miles  distant.  We  can 
sail  as  long  as  there  is  water  enough  under  our  sloop,  and 
get  to  Jones's  Sound,  and  then  on  to  the  Danish  settle- 
ments." 

"  Yes,"  said  Altamont;  "  let  us  collect  what  food  remains, 
and  be  off  at  once." 

After  a  thorough  search,  a  few  cases  of  pemmican  were 
found  scattered  here  and  there,  and  two  barrels  of  pre- 


124  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

served  meat,  altogether  enough  for  six  weeks,  and  a  good 
supply  of  powder.  It  was  soon  collected  and  brought  on 
board,  and  the  remainder  of  the  day  was  employed  in 
caulking  the  sloop  and  putting  her  in  good  trim. 

Next  morning  they  put  out  once  more  to  sea.  The  voy- 
age presented  no  great  difficulties,  the  drift-ice  being  easily 
avoided;  but  still  the  Doctor  thought  it  advisable,  in  case 
of  possible  delays,  to  limit  the  rations  to  one-half.  This 
was  no  great  hardship,  as  there  was  not  much  work  for 
anyone  to  do,  and  all  were  in  perfect  health. 

Besides,  they  found  a  little  shooting,  and  brought  down 
ducks,  and  geese,  and  guillemots,  or  sea  turtle-doves.  Wa- 
ter they  were  able  to  supply  themselves  with  in  abundance, 
from  the  fresh-water  icebergs  they  constantly  fell  in  with 
as  they  kept  near  the  coast,  not  daring  to  venture  out  in 
the  open  sea  in  so  frail  a  bark. 

At  that  time  of  the  year,  the  thermometer  was  already 
constantly  below  freezing  point.  The  frequent  rains 
changed  to  snow,  and  the  weather  became  gloomy.  Each 
day  the  sun  dipped  lower  below  the  horizon,  and  on  the 
30th,  for  a  few  minutes,  he  was  out  of  sight  altogether. 

_  However,  the  little  sloop  sailed  steadily  on  without  stop- 
ping an  instant.  They  knew  what  fatigues  and  obstacles 
a  land  journey  involved,  if  they  should  be  forced  to  adopt 
it,  and  no  time  was  to  be  lost,  for  soon  the  open  water 
would  harden  to  firm  ground;  already  the  young  ice  had 
begun  to  form.  In  these  high  latitudes  there  is  neither 
spring  nor  autumn;  winter  follows  close  on  the  heels  of 
summer. 

On  the  31st  the  first  stars  glimmered  overhead,  and  from 
that  time  forwards  there  was  continual  fog,  which  consid- 
erably impeded  navigation. 

The  Doctor  became  very  uneasy  at  these  multiplied  indi- 
cations of  approaching  winter.  He  knew  the  difficulties 
Sir  John  Ross  had  to  contend  with  after  he  left  his  ship 
to  try  and  reach  Baffin's  Bay,  and  how,  after  all,  he  was 
compelled  to  return  and  pass  a  fourth  winter  on  board.  It 
was  bad  enough  with  shelter  and  food  and  fuel,  but  if  any 
such  calamity  befell  the  survivors  of  the  Forward,  if  they 
were  obliged  to  stop  or  return,  they  were  lost. 

The  Doctor  said  nothing  of  his  anxieties  to  his  com- 
panions, but  only  urged  them  to  get  as  far  east  as  possible. 


RETURN    SOUTH  125 

At  last,  after  thirty  days'  tolerably  quick  sailing,  and 
after  battling  for  forty-eight  hours  against  the  increasing 
drift  ice,  and  risking  the  frail  sloop  a  hundred  times,  the 
navigators  saw  themselves  blocked  in  on  all  sides.  Further 
progress  was  impossible,  for  the  sea  was  frozen  in  every 
direction,  and  the  thermometer  was  only  150  above  zero. 

Altamont  made  a  reckoning  with  scrupulous  precision, 
and  found  they  were  in  JJ°  15'  latitude,  and  850  2'  longi- 
tude. 

"  This  is  our  exact  position,  then,"  said  the  Doctor. 
"  We  are  in  South  Lincoln,  just  at  Cape  Eden,  and  are 
entering  Jones's  Sound.  With  a  little  more  good  luck,  we 
should  have  found  open  water  right  to  Baffin's  Bay.  But 
we  must  not  grumble.  If  my  poor  Hatteras  had  found 
as  navigable  a  sea  at  first,  he  would  have  soon  reached  the 
Pole.  His  men  would  not  have  deserted  him,  and  his 
brain  would  not  have  given  way  under  the  pressure  of  ter- 
rible trial." 

"  I  suppose,  then,"  said  Altamont,  "  our  only  course  is 
to  leave  the  sloop,  and  get  by  sledge  to  the  east  coast  of 
Lincoln." 

"  Yes ;  but  I  think  we  should  go  through  Jones's  Sound, 
and  get  to  South  Devon  instead  of  crossing  Lincoln." 

"Why?" 

"Because  the  nearer  we  get  to  Lancaster  Sound,  the 
more  chance  we  have  of  meeting  whalers." 

"You  are  right;  but  I  question  whether  the  ice  is  firm 
enough  to  make  it  practicable." 

"  We'll  try,"  replied  Clawbonny. 

The  little  vessel  was  unloaded,  and  the  sledge  put  to- 
gether again.  All  the  parts  were  in  good  condition,  so  the 
next  day  the  dogs  were  harnessed,  and  they  started  off 
along  the  coast  to  reach  the  ice-field;  but  Altamont's  opin- 
ion proved  right.  They  could  not  get  through  Jones's 
Sound,  and  were  obliged  to  follow  the  coast  to  Lincoln. 

At  last,  on  the  24th,  they  set  foot  on  North  Devon. 

"  Now,"  said  Clawbonny,  "  we  have  only  to  cross  this, 
and  get  to  Cape  Warender  at  the  entrance  to  Lancaster 
Spund." 

But  the  weather  became  frightful,  and  very  cold;  The 
snow-storms  and  tempests  returned  with  winter  violence, 
and  the  travelers  felt  too  weak  to  contend  with  them.     Their 


126  THE   DESERT    OF   ICE 

stock  of  provisions  was  almost  exhausted,  and  rations  had 
to  be  reduced  now  to  a  third,  that  the  dogs  might  have 
food  enough  to  keep  them  in  working  condition. 

The  nature  of  the  ground  added  greatly  to  the  fatigue. 
North  Devon  is  extremely  wild  and  rugged,  and  the  path 
across  the  Trauter  mountains  is  through  difficult  gorges. 
The  whole  party — men  and  dogs,  and  sledge  alike — were 
frequently  forced  to  stop,  for  they  could  not  struggle  on 
against  the  fury  of  the  elements.  More  than  once  despair 
crept  over  the  brave  little  band,  hardy  as  they  were,  and 
used  to  Polar  sufferings.  Though  scarcely  aware  of  it 
themselves,  they  were  completely  worn  out,  physically  and 
mentally. 

It  was  not  till  the  30th  of  August  that  they  emerged 
from  those  wild  mountains  into  a  plain  which  seemed  to 
have  been  upturned  and  convulsed  by  volcanic  action  at 
some  distant  period. 

Here  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  take  a  few  days' 
rest,  for  the  travelers  could  not  drag  one  foot  after  the 
other,  and  two  of  the  dogs  had  died  from  exhaustion. 
None  of  the  party  felt  equal  to  put  up  the  tent,  so  they 
took  shelter  behind  an  iceberg. 

Provisions  were  now  so  reduced  that,  notwithstanding 
their  scanty  rations,  there  was  only  enough  left  for  one 
week.     Starvation  stared  the  poor  fellows  in  the  face. 

Altamont,  who  had  displayed  great  unselfishness  and  de- 
votion to  the  others,  roused  his  sinking  energies,  and  de- 
termined to  go  out  and  find  food  for  his  comrades. 

He  took  his  gun,  called  Duk,  and  went  off  almost  unno- 
ticed by  the  rest. 

He  had  been  absent  about  an  hour,  and  only  once  during 
that  time  had  they  heard  the  report  of  his  gun  and  now  he 
was  coming  back  empty-handed,  but  running  as  if  terrified. 

"  What  is  the  matter?  "  asked  the  Doctor. 

"  Down  there,  under  the  snow ! "  said  Altamont,  speak- 
ing as  if  scared,  and  pointing  in  a  particular  directon. 

"What?" 

"  A  whole  party  of  men !  " 

"Alive?" 

"  Dead — frozen — and  even " 

He  did  not  finish  the  sentence,  but  a  look  of  unspeakable 
horror  came  over  his  face.     The  Doctor  and  the  others 


RETURN   SOUTH  127 

were  so  roused  by  this  incident,  that  they  managed  to  get 
up  and  drag  themselves  after  Altamont  towards  the  place 
he  indicated.  They  soon  arrived  at  a  narrow  part  at  the 
bottom  of  a  ravine,  and  what  a  spectacle  met  their  gaze! 
Dead  bodies,  already  stiff,  lay  half-buried  in  a  winding- 
sheet  of  snow.  A  leg  visible  here,  an  arm  there,  and  yon- 
der shrunken  hands  and  rigid  faces,  stamped  with  the 
expression  of  rage  and  despair. 

The  Doctor  stooped  down  to  look  at  them  more  closely, 
but  instantly  started  back  pale  and  agitated,  while  Duk 
barked  ominously.     "  Horrible,  horrible !  "  he  said. 

"What  is  it?"  asked  Johnson. 

"  Don't  you  recognize  them  ?  " 

"  What  do  you  mean?  " 

"Look  and  see!" 

It  was  evident  this  ravine  had  been  but  recently  the 
scene  of  a  fearful  struggle  with  cold,  and  despair,  and  star- 
vation, for  by  certain  horrible  remains  it  was  manifest 
that  the  poor  wretches  had  been  feeding  on  human  flesh, 
perhaps  while  still  warm  and  palpitating;  and  among  them 
the  Doctor  recognized  Shandon,  Pen,  and  the  ill-fated 
crew  of  the  Forward!  Their  strength  had  failed;  provis- 
ions had  come  to  an  end ;  their  boat  had  been  broken,  per- 
haps by  an  avalanche  or  engulfed  in  some  abyss,  and  they 
could  not  take  advantage  of  the  open  sea;  or  perhaps  they 
had  lost  their  way  in  wandering  over  these  unknown  conti- 
nents. Moreover,  men  who  set  out  under  the  excitement 
of  a  revolt  were  not  likely  to  remain  long  united.  The 
leader  of  a  rebellion  has  but  a  doubtful  power,  and  no  doubt 
Shandon's  authority  had  been  soon  cast  off. 

Be  that  as  it  might,  it  was  evident  the  crew  had  come 
through  agonies  of  suffering  and  despair  before  this  last 
terrible  catastrophe,  but  the  secret  of  their  miseries  is 
buried  with  them  beneath  the  polar  snows. 

"  Come  away !  come  away !  "  said  the  Doctor,  dragging 
his  companions  from  the  scene.  Horror  gave  them  mo- 
mentary strength,  and  they  resumed  their  march  without 
stopping  a  minute  longer. 


CHAPTER   XXVI 

CONCLUSION 

It  would  be  useless  to  enumerate  all  the  misfortunes 
which  befell  the  survivors  of  this  expedition.  Even  the 
men  themselves  were  never  able  to  give  any  detailed  narra- 
tive of  the  events  which  occurred  during  the  week  subse- 
quent to  the  horrible  discovery  related  in  the  last  chapter. 
However,  on  the  9th  of  September,  by  superhuman  exer- 
tions, they  arrived  at  last  at  Cape  Horsburg,  the  extreme 
point  of  North  Devon. 

They  were  absolutely  starving.  For  forty-eight  hours 
they  had  tasted  nothing,  and  their  last  meal  had  been  off 
the  flesh  of  their  last  Esquimaux  dog.  Bell  could  go  no 
further,  and  Johnson  felt  himself  dying. 

They  were  on  the  shore  of  Baffin's  Bay,  now  half -frozen 
over ;  that  is  to  say,  on  the  road  to  Europe,  and  three  miles 
off  the  waves  were  dashing  noiselessly  on  the  sharp  edges 
of  the  ice-field.  Here  they  must  wait  their  chance  of  a 
whaler  appearing,  and  for  how  long? 

But  Heaven  pitied  the  poor  fellows,  for  the  very  next 
day  Altamont  distinctly  perceived  a  sail  on  the  horizon. 

Everyone  knows  the  torturing  suspense  that  follows 
such  an  appearance,  and  the  agonizing  dread  lest  it  should 
prove  a  false  hope.  The  vessel  seems  alternately  to  ap- 
proach and  recede,  and  too  often,  just  at  the  very  moment 
when  the  poor  castaways  think  they  are  saved,  the  sail  be- 
gins to  disappear,  and  is  soon  out  of  sight. 

The  Doctor  and  his  companions  went  through  all  these 
experiences.  They  had  succeeded  in  reaching  the  western 
boundary  of  the  ice-field  by  carrying  and  pushing  each 
other  along,  and  they  watched  the  ship  gradually  fade  away 
from  view  without  observing  them,  in  spite  of  their  loud 
cries  for  help. 

Just  then  a  happy  inspiration  came  to  the  Doctor.  His 
fertile  genius,  which  had  served  him  many  a  time  in  such 
good  stead,  supplied  him  with  one  last  idea. 

A  floe,  driven  by  the  current,  struck  against  the  ice-field, 
and  Clawbonny  exclaimed,  pointing  to  it :     "  This  floe !  " 

His  companions  could  not  understand  what  he  meant. 

"  Let  us  embark  on  it !  let  us  embark  on  it ! " 

"  Oh !  Mr.  Clawbonny,  Mr.  Clawbonny,"  said  John- 
son, pressing  his  hand. 

V.  HI  Verne  J28 


CONCLUSION  129 

Bell,  assisted  by  Altamont,  hurried  to  the  sledge,  and 
brought  back  one  of  the  poles,  which  he  stuck  fast  on  the 
ice  like  a  mast,  and  fastened  it  with  ropes.  The  tent  was 
torn  up  to  furnish  a  sail,  and  as  soon  as  the  frail  raft  was 
ready  the  poor  fellows  jumped  upon  it,  and  sailed  out  to 
the  open  sea. 

Two  hours  later,  after  unheard-of  exertions,  the  sur- 
vivors of  the  Forward  were  picked  up  by  the  Hans  Chris- 
tian, a  Danish  whaler,  on  her  way  to  Davis's  Straits.  They 
were  more  like  specters  than  human  beings,  and  the  sight 
of  their  sufferings  was  enough.  It  told  its  own  tale;  but 
the  captain  received  them  with  such  hearty  sympathy,  and 
lavished  on  them  such  care  and  kindness,  that  he  succeeded 
in  keeping  them  alive. 

Ten  days  afterwards,  Clawbonny,  Johnson,  Bell,  Alta- 
mont, and  Captain  Hatteras  landed  at  Korsam,  in  Zealand, 
an  island  belonging  to  Denmark.  They  took  the  steamer  to 
Kiel,  and  from  there  proceeded  by  Altona  and  Hamburg 
to  London,  where  they  arrived  on  the  13th  of  the  same 
month,  scarcely  recovered  after  their  long  sufferings. 

The  first  care  of  Clawbonny  was  to  request  the  Royal 
Geographical  Society  to  receive  a  communication  from  him. 
He  was  accordingly  admitted  to  the  next  seance,  and  one 
can  imagine  the  astonishment  of  the  learned  assembly  and 
the  enthusiastic  applause  produced  by  the  reading  of  Hat- 
teras's  document. 

The  English  have  a  passion  for  geographical  discovery, 
from  the  lord  to  the  cockney,  from  the  merchant  down  to 
the  dock  laborer,  and  the  news  of  this  grand  discovery 
speedily  flashed  along  the  telegraph  wires,  throughout  the 
length  and  breadth  of  the  kingdom.  Hatteras  was  lauded 
as  a  martyr  by  all  the  newspapers,  and  every  Englishman 
felt  proud  of  him. 

The  Doctor  and  his  companions  had  the  honor  of  being 
presented  to  the  Queen  by  the  Lord  Chancellor,  and  they 
were  feted  and  "  lionized  "  in  all  quarters. 

The  Government  confirmed  the  names  of  "  Queen's  Is- 
land," "Mount  Hatteras,"  and  "Altamont  Harbor."^ 

Altamont  would  not  part  from  his  companions  in  misery 
and  glory,  but  followed  them  to  Liverpool,  where  they  were 
joyously  welcomed  back,  after  being  so  long  supposed  dead 
and  buried  beneath  the  eternal  snows. 


130  THE   DESERT   OF   ICE 

But  Dr.  Clawbonny  would  never  allow  that  any  honor 
was  due  to  himself.  He  claimed  all  the  merit  of  the  dis- 
covery for  his  unfortunate  captain,  and  in  the  narrative  of 
his  voyage,  published  the  next  year  under  the  auspices  of  the 
Royal  Geographical  Society,  he  places  John  Hatteras  on  a 
level  with  the  most  illustrious  navigators,  and  makes  him 
the  compeer  of  all  the  brave,  daring  men  who  have  sacri- 
ficed themselves  for  the  progress  of  science. 

The  insanity  of  this  poor  victim  of  a  sublime  passion 
was  of  a  mild  type,  and  he  lived  quietly  at  Sten  Cottage, 
a  private  asylum  near  Liverpool,  where  the  Doctor  himself 
had  placed  him.  He  never  spoke,  and  understood  nothing 
that  was  said  to  him :  reason  and  speech  had  fled  together. 
The  only  tie  that  connected  him  with  the  outside  world  was 
his  friendship  for  Duk,  who  was  allowed  to  remain  with 
him. 

For  a  considerable  time  the  captain  had  been  in  the  habit 
of  walking  in  the  garden  for  hours,  accompanied  by  his 
faithful  dog,  who  watched  him  with  sad,  wistful  eyes,  but 
his  promenade  was  always  in  one  direction  in  a  particular 
part  of  the  garden.  When  he  got  to  the  end  of  this  path, 
he  would  stop  and  begin  to  walk  backwards.  If  anyone 
stopped  him  he  would  point  with  his  finger  towards  a  cer- 
tain part  of  the  sky,  but  let  anyone  attempt  to  turn  him 
round,  and  he  became  angry,  while  Duk,  as  if  sharing  his 
master's  sentiments,  would  bark  furiously. 

The  Doctor,  who  often  visited  his  afflicted  friend,  no- 
ticed this  strange  proceeding  one  day,  and  soon  understood 
the  reason  of  it.  He  saw  how  it  was  that  he  paced  so 
constantly  in  a  given  direction,  as  if  under  the  influence  of 
some  magnetic  force. 

This  was  the  secret:  John  Hatteras  invariably  walked 
towards  the  North. 


THE    END 


A  Trip  From  the  Earth 
to  the  Moon 


A  Trip  From  the  Earth 
to  the  Moon 

CHAPTER   I 

THE  GUN  CLUB 

URING  the  American  war  of  1861,  a  new  and 
influential  club  was  established  in  the  city  of 
Baltimore  in  the  State  of  Maryland.  It  is 
well  known  with  what  energy  the  taste  for 
military  matters  became  developed  amongst 
that  nation  of  shipowners,  shopkeepers,  and 
mechanics.  Simple  tradesmen  jumped  their  counters  to 
become  extemporized  captains,  colonels,  and  generals,  with- 
out having  ever  passed  the  School  of  Instruction  at  West 
Point;  nevertheless,  they  quickly  rivaled  their  compeers  of 
the  old  continent,  and,  like  them,  carried  off  victories  by 
dint  of  lavish  expenditure  in  ammunition,  money,  and  men. 
One  point  in  which  the  Americans  singularly  distanced 
the  Europeans  was  in  the  science  of  gunnery.  Not,  indeed, 
that  their  weapons  attained  a  higher  degree  of  perfection, 
but  that  they  exhibited  unheard-of  dimensions,  and  conse- 
quently attained  hitherto  unheard-of  ranges.  In  point  of 
grazing,  plunging,  oblique,  or  enfilading,  or  point-blank 
firing,  the  English,  French  and  Prussians  have  nothing  to 
learn;  but  their  cannon,  howitzers,  and  mortars  are  mere 
pocket-pistols  compared  with  the  formidable  engines  of  the 
American  artillery. 

This  fact  need  surprise  no  one.  The  Yankees,  the  first 
mechanicians  in  the  world,  are  engineers — just  as  the  Ital- 
ians are  musicians  and  the  Germans  metaphysicians— by 
right  of  birth.  Nothing  is  more  natural,  therefore,  than 
to  perceive  them  applying  their  audacious  ingenuity  to  the 
science  of  gunnery.  Witness  the  marvels  of  Parrott, 
Dahlgren,  and  Rodman.  The  Armstrong,  Palliser,  and 
Beaulieu  guns  were  compelled  to  bow  before  their  trans- 
atlantic rivals. 

Now  when  an  American  has  an  idea,  he  directly  seeks  a 
second  American  to  share  it.  If  there  be  three,  they  elect 
a  president  and  two  secretaries.     Given  four,  they  name  a 

133 


134       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

keeper  of  records,  and  the  office  is  ready  for  work;  jive, 
they  convene  a  general  meeting,  and  the  club  is  fully  con- 
stituted. So  things  were  managed  in  Baltimore.  The  in- 
ventor of  a  new  cannon  associated  himself  with  the  caster 
and  the  borer.  Thus  was  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  "  Gun 
Club."  In  a  single  month  after  its  formation  it  numbered 
1,833  effective  members  and  30,565  corresponding  members. 

One  condition  was  imposed  as  a  sine  qua.  non  upon  every 
candidate,  for  admission  into  the  association,  and  that  was 
the  condition  of  having  designed,  or  (more  or  less)  per- 
fected a  cannon;  or,  in  default  of  a  cannon,  at  least  a  fire- 
arm of  some  description.  It  may,  however,  be  mentioned 
that  mere  inventions  of  revolvers,  five-shooting  carbines, 
and  similar  small  arms,  met  with  but  little  consideration. 
Artillerists  always  commanded  the  chief  place  of  favor. 

The  estimation  in  which  these  gentlemen  were  held,  ac- 
cording to  one  of  the  most  scientific  exponents  of  the  Gun 
Club,  was  "  proportional  to  the  masses  of  their  guns,  and 
in  direct  ratio  of  the  square  of  the  distances  attained  by 
their  projectiles." 

The  Gun  Club  once  founded,  it  is  easy  to  conceive  the  re- 
sult of  the  inventive  genius  of  the  Americans.  Their  mili- 
tary weapons  attained  colossal  proportions,  and  their  pro- 
jectiles, exceeding  the  prescribed  limits,  unfortunately 
occasionally  cut  in  two  some  unoffending  pedestrians. 
These  inventions,  in  fact,  left  far  in  the  rear  the  timid  in- 
struments of  European  artillery. 

It  is  but  fair  to  add  that  these  Yankees,  brave  as  they 
have  ever  proved  themselves  to  be,  did  not  confine  them- 
selves to  theories  and  formulae,  but  that  they  paid  heavily, 
in  propria  persona,  for  their  inventions.  Amongst  them 
were  to  be  counted  officers  of  all  ranks,  from  lieutenants 
to  generals;  military  men  of  every  age,  from  those  who 
were  just  making  their  debut  in  the  profession  of  arms  up 
to  those  who  had  grown  old  on  the  gun-carriage.  Many 
had  found  their  rest  on  the  field  of  battles  whose  names 
figured  in  the  "  Book  of  Honor  "  of  the  Gun  Club;  and  of 
those  who  made  good  their  return  the  greater  proportion 
bore  the  marks  of  their  indisputable  valor.  Crutches, 
wooden  legs,  artificial  arms,  steel  hooks,  caoutchouc  jaws, 
silver  craniums,  platinum  noses,  were  all  to  be  found  in 
the  collection;  and  it  was  calculated  by  the  great  statisti- 


THE  GUN  CLUB  135 

cian  Pitcairn  that  throughout  the  Gun  Club  there  was  not 
quite  one  arm  between  four  persons,  and  exactly  two  legs 
between  six.  Nevertheless,  these  valiant  artillerists  took 
no  particular  account  of  these  little  facts,  and  felt  justly 
proud  when  the  dispatches  of  a  battle  returned  the  number 
of  victims  at  tenfold  the  quantity  of  the  projectiles  ex- 
pended. 

One  day,  however — sad  and  melancholy  day! — peace 
was  signed  between  the  survivors  of  the  war;  the  thunder 
of  the  guns  gradually  ceased,  the  mortars  were  silent,  the 
howitzers  were  muzzled  for  an  indefinite  period,  the  can- 
non, with  muzzles  depressed,  were  returned  into  the  arse- 
nal, the  shot  were  repiled,  all  bloody  reminiscences  were 
effaced;  the  cotton  plants  grew  luxuriantly  in  the  well- 
manured  fields,  all  mourning  garments  were  laid  aside, 
together  with  grief;  and  the  Gun  Club  was  relegated  to 
profound  inactivity. 

Some  few  of  the  more  advanced  and  inveterate  theorists 
set  themselves  again  to  work  upon  calculations  regarding 
the  laws  of  projectiles.  They  reverted  invariably  to  gi- 
gantic shells  and  howitzers  of  unparalleled  caliber.  Still, 
in  default  of  practical  experience,  what  was  the  value  of 
mere  theories?  Consequently,  the  club-rooms  became  de- 
serted, the  servants  dozed  in  the  ante-chambers,  the  news- 
papers grew  mouldy  on  the  tables,  sounds  of  snoring  came 
from  dark  corners,  and  the  members  of  the  Gun  Club,  erst- 
while so  noisy  in  their  seances,  were  reduced  to  silence  by 
this  disastrous  peace  and  gave  themselves  up  wholly  to 
dreams  of  a  Platonic  kind  of  artillery. 

"  This  is  horrible ! "  said  Tom  Hunter  one  evening,  while 
rapidly  carbonizing  his  wooden  legs  in  the  fire-place  of  the 
smoking-room ;  "  nothing  to  do !  nothing  to  look  forward 
to!  what  a  loathsome  existence!  When  again  shall  the 
guns  arouse  us  in  the  morning  with  their  delightful  re- 
ports ?  " 

"Those  days  are  gone  by,"  said  jolly  Bilsby,  trying  to 
extend  his  missing  arms.  "  It  was  delightful  once  upon  a 
time!  One  invented  a  gun,  and  hardly  was  it  cast,  when 
one  hastened  to  try  it  in  the  face  of  the  enemy!  Then  one 
returned  to  camp  with  a  word  of  encouragement  from  Sher- 
man or  a  friendly  shake  of  the  hand  from  M'Clellan.  But 
now  the  generals  are  gone  back  to  their  counters;  and  in 


136       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

place  of  projectiles,  they  dispatch  bales  of  cotton.  By- 
Jove,  the  future  of  gunnery  in  America  is  lost! " 

"Ay!  and  no  war  in  prospect!"  continued  the  famous 
Joseph  T.  Maston,  scratching  with  his  steel  hook  his  gutta- 
percha cranium.  "  Not  a  cloud  in  the  horizon !  and  that 
too  at  such  a  critical  period  in  the  progress  of  the  science  of 
artillery !  Yes,  gentlemen !  I  who  address  you  have  myself 
this  very  morning  perfected  a  model  (plan,  section,  ele- 
vation, etc.),  of  a  mortar  destined  to  change  all  the  condi- 
tions of  warfare!" 

"No!  is  it  possible?"  replied  Tom  Hunter,  his  thoughts 
reverting  involuntarily  to  a  former  invention  of  the  Hon. 
J.  T.  Maston,  by  which,  as  it  burst  at  its  first  trial,  he  had 
succeeded  in  killing  three  hundred  and  thirty-seven  people. 

"  Fact !  "  replied  he.  "  Still,  what  is  the  use  of  so  many 
studies  worked  out,  so  many  difficulties  vanquished?  It's 
mere  waste  of  time!  The  New  World  seems  to  have  made 
up  its  mind  to  live  in  peace ;  and  our  bellicose  Tribune  pre- 
dicts some  approaching  catastrophes  arising  out  of  this 
scandalous  increase  of  population." 

"  Nevertheless,"  replied  Colonel  Blomsberry,  "  they  are 
always  struggling  in  Europe  to  maintain  the  principle  of 
nationalities." 

"Well?" 

"Well,  there  might  be  some  field  for  enterprise  down 
there;  and  if  they  would  accept  our  services " 

"  What  are  you  dreaming  of  ?  "  screamed  Bilsby ;  "  work 
at  gunnery  for  the  benefit  of  foreigners?  " 

"That  would  be  better  than  doing  nothing  here,"  re- 
turned the  colonel. 

"  Quite  so,"  said  J.  T.  Maston ;  "  but  still  we  need  not 
dream  of  that  expedient." 

"  And  why  not?  "  demanded  the  Colonel. 

"Because  their  ideas  of  progress  in  the  Old  World  are 
contrary  to  our  American  habits  of  thought.  Those  fel- 
lows believe  that  one  can't  become  a  general  without  having 
served  first  as  an  ensign;  which  is  as  much  asto  say  that 
one  can't  point  a  gun  without  having  first  cast  it  oneself !  " 

"  Ridiculous !  "  replied  Tom  Hunter,  whittling  with  his 
bowie-knife  the  arms  of  his  easy-chair;  "but  if  that  be  the 
case  there,  all  that  is  left  for  us  is  to  plant  tobacco  and  dis- 
till whale-oil." 


THE  GUN  CLUB  137 

"What!"  roared  J.  T.  Maston,  "shall  we  not  employ 
these  remaining  years  of  our  life  in  perfecting  fire-arms? 
Shall  there  never  be  a  fresh  opportunity  of  trying  the 
ranges  of  projectiles?  Shall  the  air  never  again  be 
lighted  by  the  glare  of  our  guns?  No  international  diffi- 
culty ever  arise  to  enable  us  to  declare  war  against  some 
transatlantic  power  ?  Shall  not  the  French  sink  one  of  our 
steamers,  or  the  English,  in  defiance  of  the  rights  of  na- 
tions, hang  a  few  of  our  countrymen  ?  " 

"  No  such  luck,"  replied  Colonel  Blomsberry ;  "  nothing 
of  the  kind  is  likely  to  happen;  and  even  if  it  did,  we  should 
not  profit  by  it.  American  susceptibility  is  fast  declining, 
and  we  are  all  going  to  the  dogs." 

"  It  is  too  true,"  replied  J.  T.  Maston,  with  fresh  vio- 
lence ;  "  there  are  a  thousand  grounds  for  fighting,  and  yet 
we  don't  fight.  We  save  up  our  arms  and  legs  for  the 
benefit  of  nations  who  don't  know  what  to  do  with  them! 
But  stop — without  going  out  of  one's  way  to  find  a  cause 
for  war — did  not  North  America  once  belong  to  the 
English?" 

"  Undoubtedly,"  replied  Tom  Hunter,  stamping  his 
crutch  with  fury. 

"Well  then,"  replied  J.  T.  Maston,  "why  should  not 
England  in  her  turn  belong  to  the  Americans  ?  " 

"  It  would  be  but  just  and  fair,"  returned  Colonel 
Blomsberry. 

"  Go  and  propose  it  to  the  President  of  the  United 
States,"  cried  J.  T.  M.,  "  and  see  how  he  will  receive  you." 

"  Bah ! "  growled  Bilsby  between  the  four  teeth  which 
the  war  had  left  him ;  "  that  will  never  do ! " 

"  By  Jove ! "  cried  J.  T.  Maston,  "  he  mustn't  count  on 
my  vote  at  the  next  election." 

"  Nor  on  ours,"  replied  unanimously  all  the  bellicose  in- 
valids. 

"Meanwhile,"  replied  J.  T.  M.,  "allow  me  to  say  that, 
if  I  cannot  get  an  opportunity  to  try  my  new  mortars  on 
a  real  field  of  battle,  I  shall  say  good-by  to  the  members 
of  the  Gun  Club,  and  go  and  bury  myself  in  the  prairies  of 
Arkansas !  " 

"  In  that  case  we  will  accompany  you,"  cried  the  others. 

Matters  were  in  this  unfortunate  condition,  and  the  club 
was  threatened  with  approaching  dissolution,  when  an  un- 


138       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

expected  circumstance  occurred  to  prevent  so  deplorable  a 
catastrophe. 

On  the  morrow  after  this  conversation  every  member  of 
the  association  received  a  sealed  circular  couched  in  the 
following  terms : 

Baltimore,  Oct.  3. 

"  The  President  of  the  Gun  Club  has  the  honor  to  in- 
form his  colleagues  that,  at  the  meeting  of  the  5th  instant, 
he  will  bring  before  them  a  communication  of  an  extremely 
interesting  nature.  He  requests,  therefore,  that  they  will 
make  it  convenient  to  attend  in  accordance  with  the  pres- 
ent invitation.     Very  cordially, 

"  Impey  Barbicane,  P.  G.  C." 


CHAPTER    II 

PRESIDENT  BARBICANE'S  COMMUNICATION 

On  the  5th  of  October,  at  8  p.  m.,  a  dense  crowd 
pressed  towards  the  saloons  of  the  Gun  Club  at  No.  21 
Union  Square.  All  the  members  of  the  association  resi- 
dent in  Baltimore  attended  the  invitation  of  their  president. 
As  regards  the  corresponding  members,  notices  were  de- 
livered by  hundreds  throughout  the  streets  of  the  city,  and, 
large  as  was  the  great  hall,  it  was  quite  inadequate  to  ac- 
commodate the  crowd  of  savants.  They  overflowed  into 
the  adjoining  rooms,  down  the  narrow  passages,  into  the 
outer  court-yards.  There  they  ran  against  the  vulgar  herd 
who  pressed  up  to  the  doors,  each  struggling  to  reach  the 
front  ranks,  all  eager  to  learn  the  nature  of  the  important 
communication  of  President  Barbicane;  all  pushing,  squeez- 
ing, crushing  with  that  perfect  freedom  of  action  which  is 
peculiar  to  the  masses  when  educated  in  ideas  of  "  self- 
government." 

On  that  evening  a  stranger  who  might  have  chanced  to 
be  in  Baltimore  could  not  have  gained  admission  for  love 
or  money  into  the  great  hall.  That  was  reserved  ex- 
clusively for  resident  or  corresponding  members;  no  one 
else  could  possibly  have  obtained  a  place ;  and  the  city  mag- 
nates, municipal  councilors,  and  "  select  men  "  were  com- 
pelled to  mingle  with  the  mere  townspeople  in  order  to 
catch  stray  bits  of  news  from  the  interior. 


BARBICANE'S  COMMUNICATION  139 

The  vast  hall  presented  a  curious  spectacle.  Its  im- 
mense area  was  singularly  adapted  to  the  purpose.  Lofty 
pillars  formed  of  cannon,  superposed  upon  huge  mortars 
as  a  base,  supported  the  fine  ironwork  of  the  arches,  a 
perfect  piece  of  cast-iron  lacework.  Trophies  of  blun- 
derbuses,  matchlocks,  arquebuses,  carbines,  all  kinds  of 
firearms,  ancient  and  modern,  were  picturesquely  inter- 
laced against  the  walls.  The  gas  lit  up  in  full  glare 
myriads  of  revolvers  grouped  in  the  form  of  lusters,  whilst 
groups  of  pistols,  and  candelabra  formed  of  muskets  bound 
together,  completed  this  magnificent  display  of  brilliance. 
Models  of  cannon,  bronze  castings,  sights  covered  with 
dents,  plates  battered  by  the  shots  of  the  Gun  Club,  assort- 
ments of  rammers  and  sponges,  chaplets  of  shells,  wreaths 
of  projectiles,  garlands  of  howitzers — in  short,  all  the  ap- 
paratus of  the  artillerist,  enchanted  the  eye  by  this  won- 
derful arrangement  and  induced  a  kind  of  belief  that  their 
real  purpose  was  ornamental  rather  than  deadly. 

At  the  further  end  of  the  saloon  the  president,  assisted 
by  four  secretaries,  occupied  a  large  platform.  His  chair, 
supported  by  a  carved  gun-carriage,  was  modeled  upon  the 
ponderous  proportions  of  a  32-inch  mortar.  It  was 
pointed  at  an  angle  of  ninety  degrees,  and  suspended  upon 
trunnions,  so  that  the  president  could  balance  himself  upon 
it  as  upon  a  rocking-chair,  a  very  agreeable  fact  in 
the  very  hot  weather.  Upon  the  table  (a  huge  iron 
plate  supported  upon  six  carronnades)  stood  an  inkstand 
of  exquisite  elegance,  made  of  a  beautifully  chased  Spanish 
piece,  and  a  sonnette,  which,  when  required,  could  give  forth 
a  report  equal  to  that  of  a  revolver.  During  violent  debates 
this  novel  kind  of  bell  scarcely  sufficed  to  drown  the  clamor 
of  these  excitable  artillerists. 

Impey  Barbicane  was  a  man  of  forty  years  of  age,  calm, 
cold,  austere;  of  a  singularly  serious  and  self-contained 
demeanor,  punctual  as  a  chronometer,  of  imperturbable 
temper  and  immovable  character;  by  no  means  chivalrous, 
yet  adventurous  withal,  and  always  bringing  practical  ideas 
to  bear  upon  the  very  rashest  enterprises ;  an  essential  New- 
Englander,  a  Northern  colonist,  a  descendant  of  the  old 
anti-Stuart  Roundheads,  and  the  implacable  enemy  of  the 
gentlemen  of  the  South,  those  ancient  Cavaliers  of  the 
mother-country.    In  a  word,  he  was  a  thorough  Yankee. 


140       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

Barbicane  had  made  a  large  fortune  as  a  timber  mer- 
chant. Being  nominated  Director  of  Artillery  during  the 
war,  he  proved  himself  fertile  in  invention.  Bold  in  his 
conceptions,  he  contributed  powerfully  to  the  progress  of 
that  arm  and  gave  an  immense  impetus  to  experimental  re- 
searches. 

He  was  a  personage  of  the  middle  height,  having,  by  a 
rare  exception  in  the  Gun  Club,  all  his  limbs  complete. 
His  strongly-marked  features  seemed  drawn  by  square  and 
rule;  and  if  it  be  true  that,  in  order  to  judge  of  a  man's 
character  one  must  look  at  his  profile,  Barbicane,  so  exam- 
ined, exhibited  the  most  certain  indications  of  energy,  au- 
dacity, and  sang-froid. 

At  this  moment  he  was  sitting  in  his  armchair,  silent, 
absorbed,  lost  in  reflection,  sheltered  under  his  high-crowned 
hat — a  kind  of  black  silk  cylinder  which  always  seems 
firmly  screwed  upon  the  head  of  an  American. 

Just  when  the  deep-toned  clock  in  the  great  hall  struck 
eight,  Barbicane,  as  if  he  had  been  set  in  motion  by  a 
spring,  raised  himself  up.  A  profound  silence  ensued,  and 
the  speaker,  in  a  somewhat  emphatic  tone  of  voice,  com- 
menced as  follows  : 

"  My  brave  colleagues,  too  long  already  a  paralyzing 
peace  has  plunged  the  members  of  the  Gun  Club  in  deplor- 
able inactivity.  After  a  period  of  years  full  of  incidents 
we  have  been  compelled  to  abandon  our  labors,  and  to  stop 
short  on  the  road  of  progress.  I  do  not  hesitate  to  state, 
boldly,  that  any  war  which  should  recall  us  to  arms  would 
be  welcome!  "  (Tremendous  applause!)  "  But  war,  gen- 
tlemen, is  impossible  under  existing  circumstances;  and, 
however  we  may  desire  it,  many  years  may  elapse  before 
our  cannon  shall  again  thunder  in  the  field  of  battle.  _  We 
must  make  up  our  minds,  then,  to  seek  in  another  train  of 
ideas  some  field  for  the  activity  which  we  all  pine  for." 

The  meeting  felt  that  the  president  was  now  approaching 
the  critical  point,  and  redoubled  their  attention  accordingly. 

"  For  some  months  past,  my  brave  colleagues,"  contin- 
ued Barbicane,  "  I  have  been  asking  myself  whether,  while 
confining  ourselves  to  our  own  particular  objects,  we  could 
not  enter  upon  some  grand  experiment  worthy  of  the  nine- 
teenth century ;  and  whether  the  progress  of  artillery  science 
would  not  enable  us  to  carry  it  out  to  a  successful  issue. 


BARBICANE'S  COMMUNICATION  141 

I  have  been  considering,  working,  calculating;  and  the  re- 
sult of  my  studies  is  the  conviction  that  we  are  safe  to  suc- 
ceed in  an  enterprise  which  to  any  other  country  would 
appear  wholly  impracticable.  This  project,  the  result  of 
long  elaboration,  is  the  object  of  my  present  communication. 
It  is  worthy  of  yourselves,  worthy  of  the  antecedents  of 
the  Gun  Club ;  and  it  cannot  fail  to  make  some  noise  in  the 
world." 

A  thrill  of  excitement  ran  through  the  meeting. 

Barbicane,  having  by  a  rapid  movement  firmly  fixed  his 
hat  upon  his  head,  calmly  continued  his  harangue :  "  There 
is  no  one  among  you,  my  brave  colleagues,  who  has  not 
seen  the  Moon,  or,  at  least,  heard  speak  of  it.  Don't  be 
surprised  if  I  am  about  to  discourse  to  you  regarding  this 
Queen  of  the  Night.  It  is  perhaps  reserved  for  us  to  be- 
come the  Columbuses  of  this  unknown  world.  Only  enter 
into  my  plans,  and  second  me  with  all  your  power,  and  I 
will  lead  you  to  its  conquest,  and  its  name  shall  be  added 
to  those  of  the  thirty-six  States  which  compose  this  Great 
Union." 

"Three  cheers  for  the  Moon!"  roared  the  Gun  Club, 
with  one  voice. 

"  The  moon,  gentlemen,  has  been  carefully  studied,"  con- 
tinued Barbicane ;  "  her  mass,  density,  and  weight ;  her  con- 
stitution, motions,  distance,  as  well  as  her  place  in  the  solar 
system,  have  all  been  exactly  determined.  Stenographic 
charts  have  been  constructed  with  a  perfection  which  equals, 
if  it  does  not  even  surpass,  that  of  our  terrestrial  maps. 
Photography  has  given  us  proofs  of  the  incomparable 
beauty  of  our  satellite;  in  short,  all  is  known  regarding 
the  moon  which  mathematical  science,  astronomy,  geology, 
and  optics  can  learn  about  her.  But  up  to  the  present  mo- 
ment no  direct  communication  has  been  established  with 
her." 

A  violent  movement  of  interest  and  surprise  here  greeted 
this  remark  of  the  speaker.  . 

"  Permit  me,"  he  continued,  "  to  recount  to  you  briefly 
how  certain  ardent  spirits,  starting  on  imaginary  journeys, 
have  penetrated  the  secrets  of  our  satellite.  In  the  seven- 
teenth century  a  certain  David  Fabricius  boasted  of  hav- 
ing seen  with  his  own  eyes  the  inhabitants  of  the  moon. 
In   1649  a  Frenchman,   one  Jean  Baudoin,  published  a 


142       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

'  Journey  performed  from  the  Earth  to  the  Moon  by  Do- 
mingo Gonzalez/  a  Spanish  Adventurer.  At  the  same 
period  Cyrano  de  Bergerac  published  that  celebrated  '  Jour- 
neys in  the  Moon '  which  met  with  such  success  in  France. 
Somewhat  later  another  Frenchman,  named  Fontenelle, 
wrote  '  The  Plurality  of  Worlds/  a  chef-d'ceuvre  of  its 
time.  About  1835  a  small  treatise,  translated  from  the 
New  York  American,  related  how  Sir  John  Herschell,  hav- 
ing been  dispatched  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  for  the 
purpose  of  making  there  some  astronomical  calculations, 
had,  by  means  of  a  telescope  brought  to  perfection  by  means 
of  internal  lighting,  reduced  the  apparent  distance  of  the 
moon  to  eighty  yards!  He  then  distinctly  perceived  cav- 
erns frequented  by  hippopotami,  green  mountains  bordered 
by  golden  lace-work,  sheep  with  horns  of  ivory,  a  white 
species  of  deer,  and  inhabitants  with  membranous  wings, 
like  bats.  This  brochure,  the  work  of  an  American  named 
Locke,  had  a  great  sale.  But,  to  bring  this  rapid  sketch 
to  a  close,  I  will  only  add  that  a  certain  Hans  Pfaal,  of 
Rotterdam,  launching  himself  in  a  balloon  filled  with  a  gas 
extracted  from  nitrogen,  thirty-seven  times  lighter  than 
hydrogen,  reached  the  moon  after  a  passage  of  nineteen 
hours.  This  journey,  like  all  the  previous  ones,  was  purely 
imaginary;  still,  it  was  the  work  of  a  popular  American 
author — I  mean,  Edgar  Poe !  " 

"  Cheers  for  Edgar  Poe ! "  roared  the  assemblage,  elec- 
trified by  their  president's  words. 

"  I  have  now  enumerated,"  said  Barbicane,  "  the  experi- 
ments which  I  call  purely  paper  ones,  wholly  insufficient  to 
establish  serious  relations  with  the  Queen  of  Night.  Nev- 
ertheless, I  am  bound  to  add  that  some  practical  geniuses 
have  attempted  to  establish  actual  communication  with 
her.  Thus,  a  few  years  ago,  a  German  geometrician  pro- 
posed to  send  a  scientific  expedition  to  the  steppes  of 
Siberia.  There,  on  those  vast  plains,  they  were  to  describe 
enormous  geometric  figures,  drawn  in  characters  of  reflect- 
ing luminosity,  amongst  which  was  the  prop,  regarding  the 
'  square  of  the  hypothenuse/  commonly  called  the  *  Ass's 
bridge '  by  the  French.  '  Every  intelligent  being/  said  the 
geometrician,  'must  understand  the  scientific  meaning  of 
that  figure.  The  Selenites,  do  they  exist,  will  respond  by 
a  similar  figure;  and,  a  communication  being  thus  once  es- 


BARBICANE'S  COMMUNICATION  143 

tablished,  it  will  be  easy  to  form  an  alphabet  which  shall 
enable  us  to  converse  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  moon.' 
So  spoke  the  German  geometrician;  but  his  project  was 
never  put  into  practice,  and  up  to  the  present  day  there  is 
no  bond  in  existence  between  the  earth  and  her  satellite. 
It  is  reserved  for  the  practical  genius  of  Americans  to 
establish  a  communication  with  this  sidereal  world.  The 
means  of  arriving  thither  are  simple,  easy,  certain,  infalli- 
ble— and  that  is  the  purpose  of  my  present  proposal." 

A  storm  of  acclamations  greeted  these  words.  There 
was  not  a  single  person  in  the  whole  audience  who  was  not 
overcome,  carried  away,  lifted  out  of  himself  by  the  speak- 
er's words! 

Long  continued  applause  resounded  from  all  sides. 

As  soon  as  the  excitement  had  partially  subsided,  Barbi- 
cane  resumed  his  speech  in  a  somewhat  graver  voice. 

"  You  know,"  said  he,  "  what  progress  artillery  science 
has  made  during  the  last  few  years,  and  what  a  degree  of 
perfection  fire-arms  of  every  kind,  have  reached.  More- 
over, you  are  well  aware  that  in  general  terms,  the  resisting 
power  of  cannon  and  the  expansive  force  of  gunpowder 
are  practically  unlimited.  Well !  starting  from  this  princi- 
ple, I  ask  myself  whether,  supposing  sufficient  apparatus 
could  be  obtained  constructed  upon  the  conditions  of  ascer- 
tained resistance,  it  might  not  be  possible  to  project  a  shot 
up  to  the  moon  ?  " 

At  these  words  a  murmur  of  amazement  escaped  from  a 
thousand  panting  chests;  then  succeeded  a  moment  of  per- 
fect silence,  resembling  that  profound  stillness  which  pre- 
cedes the  bursting  of  a  thunderstorm.  In  point  of  fact,  a 
thunderstorm  did  peal  forth,  but  it  was  the  thunder  of  ap- 
plause, of  cries,  and  of  uproar  which  made  the  very  hall 
tremble.  The  president  attempted  to  speak,  but  could  not. 
It  was  fully  ten  minutes  before  he  could  make  himself 
heard. 

"  Suffer  me  to  finish,"  he  calmly  continued.  "  I  have 
looked  at  the  question  in  all  its  bearings,  I  have  resolutely 
attacked  it,  and  by  incontrovertible  calculations  I  find  that 
a  projectile  endowed  with  an  initial  velocity  of  i2,opo  yards 
per  second,  and  aimed  at  the  moon,  must  necessarily  reach 
it.  I  have  the  honor,  my  brave  colleagues,  to  propose  a 
trial  of  this  little  experiment." 


CHAPTER   III 

EFFECT  OF  THE  PRESIDENT'S  COMMUNICATION 

It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  effect  produced  by  the 
last  words  of  the  honorable  president — the  cries,  the  shouts, 
the  succession  of  roars,  hurrahs,  and  all  the  varied  vo- 
ciferations which  the  American  language  is  capable  of 
supplying.  It  was  a  scene  of  indescribable  confusion  and 
uproar.  They  shouted,  they  clapped,  they  stamped  on  the 
floor  of  the  hall.  All  the  weapons  in  the  museum  dis- 
charged at  once  could  not  have  more  violently  set  in  motion 
the  waves  of  sound.  One  need  not  be  surprised  at  this. 
There  are  some  cannoneers  nearly  as  noisy  as  their  own 
guns. 

Barbicane  remained  calm  in  the  midst  of  this  enthusias- 
tic clamor;  perhaps  he  was  desirous  of  addressing  a  few 
more  words  to  his  colleagues,  for  by  his  gestures  he  de- 
manded silence,  and  his  powerful  alarum  was  worn  out  by 
its  violent  reports.  No  attention,  however,  was  paid  to  his 
requests.  He  was  presently  torn  from  his  seat  and  passed 
from  the  hands  of  his  faithful  colleagues  into  the  arms  of 
a  no  less  excited  crowd. 

Nothing  can  astound  an  American.  It  has  often  been 
asserted  that  the  word  "  impossible  "  is  not  a  French  one. 
So  too  in  America,  all  is  easy,  all  is  simple ;  and  as  for  me- 
chanical difficulties,  they  are  overcome  before  they  arise. 
Between  Barbicane's  proposition  and  its  realization  no  true 
Yankee  would  have  allowed  even  the  semblance  of  a  diffi- 
culty to  be  possible.  A  thing  with  them  is  no  sooner  said 
than  done. 

The  triumphal  progress  of  the  president  continued 
throughout  the  evening.  It  was  a  regular  torchlight  pro- 
cession. Irish,  Germans,  French,  Scotch,  all  the  hetero- 
genous units  which  make  up  the  population  of  Maryland 
shouted  in  their  respective  vernaculars;  and  the  "vivas," 
"  hurrahs,"  and  "  bravos  "  were  intermingled  in  inexpressi- 
ble enthusiasm. 

Just  at  this  crisis,  as  though  she  comprehended  all  this 
agitation  regarding  herself,  the  Moon  shone  forth  with 
serene  splendor,  eclipsing  by  her  intense  illumination  all 
the  surrounding  lights.  The  Yankees  all  turned  their  gaze 
towards  her  resplendent  orb,  kissed  their  hands,  called  her 
by  all  kinds  of  endearing  names.     Between  eight  o'clock 

V.  Til  Verne  144 


--'•:v  -V-i:a.  .-vfti; 


"FIRE!" 

An  appalling,  unearthly  report  followed  instantly,  such  as  can  be 
compared  to  nothing  whatever  known,  not  even  to  the  roar  of  thunder, 
or  the  blast  of  volcanic  explosions  !  No  words  can  convey  the  slightest 
idea  of  the  terrific  sound  !  An  immense  spout  of  fire  shot  up  from  the 
bowels  of  the  earth  as  from  a  crater.  The  earth  heaved  up  and  with 
great  difficulty  some  few  spectators  obtained  a  momentary  glimpse  of 
the  projectile  victoriously  cleaving  the  air  in  the  midst  of  the  fiery 
vapors  ! — Page  238. 


EFFECT  OF  THE  COMMUNICATION       145 

and  midnight  one  optician  in  Jones'-Fall  Street  made  his 
fortune  by  the  sale  of  opera-glasses. 

Midnight  arrived,  and  the  enthusiasm  showed  no  signs 
of  diminution.  It  spread  equally  among  all  classes  of  cit- 
izens— men  of  science,  shopkeepers,  merchants,  porters, 
chair-men,  as  well  as  "greenhorns,"  were  stirred  in  their 
innermost  fiber.  A  national  enterprise  was  at  stake.  The 
whole  city,  high  and  low,  the  quays  bordering  the  Patapsco, 
the  ships  lying  in  the  basins,  disgorging  a  crowd  drunk 
with  joy,  gin,  and  whisky.  Everyone  chattered,  argued, 
discussed,  disputed,  applauded,  from  the  gentleman  lounging 
upon  the  bar-room  settee  with  his  tumbler  of  sherry-cob- 
bler before  him  down  to  the  waterman  who  got  drunk 
upon  his  "  knock-me-down "  in  the  dingy  taverns  of  Fell 
Point. 

About  2  a.  mv  however,  the  excitement  began  to  sub- 
side. President  Barbicane  reached  his  house,  bruised, 
crushed,  and  squeezed  almost  to  a  mummy.  A  Hercules 
could  not  have  resisted  a  similar  outbreak  of  enthusiasm. 
The  crowd  gradually  deserted  the  squares  and  streets. 
The  four  railways  from  Philadelphia  and  Washington, 
Harrisburg  and  Wheeling,  which  converge  at  Baltimore, 
whirled  away  the  heterogenous  population  to  the  four  cor- 
ners of  the  United  States,  and  the  city  subsided  into  com- 
parative tranquillity. 

On  the  following  day,  thanks  to  the  telegraph  wires,  five 
hundred  newspapers  and  journals,  daily,  weekly,  monthly, 
or  bi-monthly,  all  took  up  the  question.  They  examined 
it  under  all  its  different  aspects,  physical,  meteorological, 
economical,  or  moral,  up  to  its  bearings  on  politics  or  civi- 
lization. They  debated  whether  the  moon  was  a  finished 
world,  or  whether  it  was  destined  to  undergo  any  further 
transformation.  Did  it  resemble  the  earth  at  the  period 
when  the  latter  was  destitute  as  yet  of  an  atmosphere? 
What  kind  of  spectacle  would  its  hidden  hemisphere  pre- 
sent to  our  terrestrial  spheroid?  Granting  that  the  ques- 
tion at  present  was  simply  that  of  sending  a  projectile  up 
to  the  moon,  everyone  must  see  that  that  involved  the 
commencement  of  a  series  of  experiments.  All  must  hope 
that  some  day  America  would  penetrate  the  deepest  secrets 
of  that  mysterious  orb ;  and  some  even  seemed  to  fear  lest 
its  conquest  should  not  derange  the  equilibrium  of  Europe. 


146      FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

The  project  once  under  discussion,  not  a  single  para- 
graph suggested  a  doubt  of  its  realization.  All  the  papers, 
pamphlets,  reports — all  the  journals  published  by  the  scien- 
tific, literary,  and  religious  societies  enlarged  upon  its 
advantages;  and  the  Society  of  Natural  History  of  Boston, 
the  Society  of  Science  and  Art  of  Albany,  the  Geographical 
and  Statistical  Society  of  New  York,  and  Philosophical 
Society  of  Philadelphia,  and  the  Smithsonian  of  Washing- 
ton, sent  innumerable  letters  of  congratulation  to  the  Gun 
Club,  together  with  offers  of  immediate  assistance  and 
money. 

From  that  day  forward  Impey  Barbicane  became  one  of 
the  greatest  citizens  of  the  United  States,  a  kind  of  Wash- 
ington of  Science.  A  single  trait  of  feeling,  taken  from 
many  others,  will  serve  to  show  the  point  which  this  hom- 
age of  a  whole  people  to  a  single  individual  attained. 

Some  few  days  after  this  memorable  meeting  of  the  Gun 
Club,  the  manager  of  an  English  company  announced,  at 
the  Baltimore  theater,  the  production  of  "  Much  ado  about 
Nothing."  But  the  populace,  seeing  in  that  title  _  an  allu- 
sion damaging  to  Barbicane's  project,  broke  into  the 
auditorium,  smashed  the  benches,  and  compelled  the  un- 
lucky director  to  alter  his  playbill.  Being  a  sensible  man, 
he  bowed  to  the  public  will  and  replaced  the  offending 
comedy  by  "  As  you  like  it " ;  and  for  many  weeks  he  real- 
ized fabulous  profits. 

CHAPTER   IV 

REPLY  FROM   THE  OBSERVATORY  OF   CAMBRIDGE 

Barbicane,  however,  lost  not  one  moment  amidst  all  the 
enthusiasm  of  which  he  had  become  the  object.  His  first 
care  was  to  reassemble  his  colleagues  in  the  board-room  of 
the  Gun  Club.  There,  after  some  discussion,  it  was  agreed 
to  consult  the  astronomers  regarding  the  astronomical  part 
of  the  enterprise.  Their  reply  once  ascertained,  they 
could  then  discuss  the  mechanical  means,  and  nothing  should 
be  wanting  to  ensure  the  success  of  this  great  experiment. 

A!  note  couched  in  precise  terms,  containing  special  in- 
terrogatories, was  then  drawn  up  and  addressed  to  the 
Observatory  of  Cambridge  in  Massachusetts.     This  city, 


REPLY  FROM  THE  OBSERVATORY   147 

where  the  first  University  of  the  United  States  was 
founded,  is  justly  celebrated  for  its  astronomical  staff. 
There  are  to  be  found  assembled  all  the  most  eminent  men 
of  science.  Here  is  to  be  seen  at  work  that  powerful 
telescope  which  enabled  Bond  to  resolve  the  nebula  of 
Andromeda,  and  Clarke  to  discover  the  satellite  of  Sirius. 
This  celebrated  institution  fully  justified  on  all  points  the 
confidence  reposed  in  it  by  the  Gun  Club. 

So,  after  two  days,  the  reply  so  impatiently  awaited  was 
placed  in  the  hands  of  President  Barbicane. 

It  was  couched  in  the  following  terms : 
"  The  Director  of  the  Cambridge  Observatory  to  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  Gun  Club  at  Baltimore. 

"  Cambridge,  Oct.  7. 

"  On  the  receipt  of  your  favor  of  the  6th  inst,  addressed 
to  the  Observatory  of  Cambridge  in  the  name  of  the  Mem- 
bers of  the  Baltimore  Gun  Club,  our  staff  was  immediately 
called  together,  and  it  was  judged  expedient  to  reply  .as 
follows : 

"The  questions  which  have  been  proposed  to  it  are 
these : 

"1.  Is  it  possible  to  transmit  a  projectile  up  to  the 
moon  ? 

■  '  2.  What  is  the  exact  distance  which  separates  the 
earth  from  its  satellite  ? 

"  '  3.  What  will  be  the  period  of  transit  of  the  projectile 
when  endowed  with  sufficient  initial  velocity?  and,  conse- 
quently, at  what  moment  ought  it  to  be  discharged  in  order 
that  it  may  touch  the  moon  at  a  particular  point? 

"  '  4.  At  what  precise  moment  will  the  moon  present 
herself  in  the  most  favorable  position  to  be  reached  by  the 
projectile? 

"  *  5.  What  point  in  the  heavens  ought  the  cannon  to  be 
aimed  at  which  is  intended  to  discharge  the  projectile? 

"  '  6.  What  place  will  the  moon  occupy  in  the  heavens 
at  the  moment  of  the  projectile's  departure? 

"  Regarding  the  first  question,  '  Is  it  possible  to  transmit 
a  projectile  up  to  the  moon? ' 

"  Answer. — Yes ;  provided  it  possesses  an  initial  velocity 
of  12,000  yards  per  second;  calculations  prove  that  to  be 
sufficient.  In  proportion  as  we  recede  from  the  earth  the 
action  of  gravitation  diminishes  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the 


148       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

square  of  the  distance ;  that  is  to  say,  at  three  times  a  given 
distance  the  action  is  nine  times  less.  Consequently,  the 
weight  of  a  shot  will  decrease,  and  will  become  reduced  to 
zero  at  the  instant  that  the  attraction  of  the  moon  exactly 
counterpoises  that  of  the  earth;  that  is  to  say,  at  47/52  of 
its  passage.  At  that  instant  the  projectile  will  have  no 
weight  whatever;  and,  if  it  passes  that  point,  it  will  fall 
into  the  moon  by  the  sole  effect  of  the  lunar  attraction. 
The  theoretical  possibility  of  the  experiment  is  therefore 
absolutely  demonstrated;  its  success  must  depend  upon  the 
power  of  the  engine  employed. 

"  As  to  the  second  question,  '  What  is  the  exact  distance 
which  separates  the  earth  from  its  satellite  ?  ' 

"''Answer. — The  moon  does  not  describe  a  circle  round 
the  earth,  but  rather  an  ellipse,  of  which  our  earth  occupies 
one  of  the  foci;  the  consequence,  therefore,  is,  that  at  cer- 
tain times  it  approaches  nearer  to,  and  at  others  it  recedes 
farther  from,  the  earth;  in  astronomical  language,  it  is  at 
one  time  in  apogee,  at  another  in  perigee.  Now  the  differ- 
ence between  its  greatest  and  its  least  distance  is  too  con- 
siderable to  be  left  out  of  consideration.  In  point  of  fact, 
in  its  apogee  the  moon  is  247,552  miles,  and  in  its  perigee, 
218,657  miles  only  distant;  a  fact  which  makes  a  difference 
of  28,895  miles,  or  more  than  one  ninth  of  the  entire  dis- 
tance. The  perigee  distance,  therefore,  is  that  which  ought 
to  serve  as  the  basis  of  all  calculations. 

"  To  the  third  question : 

"Answer. — If  the  shot  should  preserve  continuously  its 
initial  velocity  of  12,000  yards  per  second,  it  would  require 
little  more  than  nine  hours  to  reach  its  destination ;  but,  in- 
asmuch as  that  initial  velocity  will  be  continually  decreasing, 
it  results  that,  taking  everything  into  consideration,  it  will 
occupy  300,000  seconds,  that  is  83hrs.  20m.  in  reaching 
the  point  where  the  attraction  of  the  earth  and  the  moon 
will  be  in  equilibrio.  From  this  point  it  will  fall  into  the 
moon  in  50,000  seconds,  or  I3hrs.  53m.  20sec.  It  will  be 
desirable,  therefore,  to  discharge  it  97hrs.  13m.  20sec.  be- 
fore the  arrival  of  the  moon  at  the  point  aimed  at. 

"Regarding  question  four,  'At  what  precise  moment 
will  the  moon  present  herself  in  the  most  favorable  posi- 
tion, etc.  ? ' 

"Answer. — After  what  has  been  said  above,  it  will  be 


REPLY  FROM  THE  OBSERVATORY   149 

necessary,  first  of  all,  to  choose  the  period  when  the  moon 
will  be  in  perigee,  and  also  the  moment  when  she  will  be 
crossing  the  zenith,  which  latter  event  will  further  diminish 
the  entire  distance  by  a  length  equal  to  the  radius  of  the 
earth,  i.e.  3,919  miles;  the  result  of  which  will  be  that  the 
final  passage  remaining  to  be  accomplished  will  be  214,976 
miles.  But  although  the  moon  passes  her  perigee  every 
month,  she  does  not  reach  the  zenith  always  at  exactly  the 
same  moment.  She  does  not  appear  under  these  two  con- 
ditions simultaneously,  except  at  long  intervals  of  time. 
It  will  be  necessary,  therefore,  to  wait  for  the  moment 
when  her  passage  in  perigee  shall  coincide  with  that  in 
the  zenith.  Now,  by  a  fortunate  circumstance,  on  the  4th 
of  December  in  the  ensuing  year  the  moon  will  present 
these  two  conditions.  At  midnight  she  will  be  in  perigee, 
that  is,  at  her  shortest  distance  from  the  earth,  and  at  the 
same  moment  she  will  be  crossing  the  zenith. 

"  On  the  fifth  question,  '  At  what  point  in  the  heavens 
ought  the  cannon  to  be  aimed? ' 

"Answer. — The  preceding  remarks  being  admitted,  the 
cannon  ought  to  be  pointed  to  the  zenith  of  the  place.  Its 
fire,  therefore,  will  be  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the 
horizon;  and  the  projectile  will  soonest  pass  beyond  the 
range  of  the  terrestrial  attraction.  But,  in  order  that  the 
moon  should  reach  the  zenith  of  a  given  place,  it  is  neces- 
sary that  the  place  should  not  exceed  in  latitude  the  declina- 
tion of  the  luminary ;  in  other  words,  it  must  be  comprised 
between  the  degrees  o°  and  28°  of  lat.  N.  or  S.  In  every 
other  spot  the  fire  must  necessarily  be  oblique,  which  would 
seriously  militate  against  the  success  of  the  experiment. 

"  As  to  the  sixth  question,  *  What  place  will  the  moon 
occupy  in  the  heavens  at  the  moment  of  the  projectile's  de- 
parture ? ' 

"Answer. — At  the  moment  when  the  projectile  shall  be 
discharged  into  space,  the  moon,  which  travels  daily  for- 
ward 1 30  10'  35",  will  be  distant  from  the  zenith  point  by 
four  times  that  quantity,  9,  e.  by  52 °  42'  20",  a  space  which 
corresponds  to  the  path  which  she  will  describe  during  the 
entire  journey  of  the  projectile.  But,  inasmuch  as  it  is 
equally  necessary  to  take  into  account  the  deviation  which 
the  rotary  motion  of  the  earth  will  impart  to  the  shot,  and 
as  the  shot  cannot  reach  the  moon  until  after  a  deviation 


150       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

equal  to  16  radii  of  the  earth,  which,  calculated  upon  the 
moon's  orbit,  are  equal  to  about  eleven  degrees,  it  becomes 
necessary  to  add  these  eleven  degrees  to  those  which  ex- 
press the  retardation  of  the  moon  just  mentioned:  that  is 
to  say,  in  round  numbers,  about  64  degrees.  Consequently, 
at  the  moment  of  firing  the  visual  radius  applied  to  the 
moon  will  describe,  with  the  vertical  line  of  the  place,  an 
angle  of  sixty- four  degrees. 

"These  are  our  answers  to  the  questions  proposed  to 
the  Observatory  of  Cambridge  by  the  members  of  the  Gun 
Club. 

"  To  sum  up : 

"  1  st.  The  cannon  ought  to  be  planted  in  a  country 
situated  between  o°  and  280  of  N.  or  S.  lat. 

"  2ndly.  It  ought  to  be  pointed  directly  towards  the  ze- 
nith of  the  place. 

"3rdly.  The  projectile  ought  to  be  propelled  with  an 
initial  velocity  of  12,000  yards  per  second. 

"4thly.  It  ought  to  be  discharged  at  iohrs.  46m. 
40sec.  of  the  1st  of  December  of  the  ensuing  year. 

"  5thly.  It  will  meet  the  moon  four  days  after  its  dis- 
charge, precisely  at  midnight  on  the  4th  of  December,  at 
the  moment  of  its  transit  across  the  zenith. 

"  The  members  of  the  Gun  Club  ought,  therefore,  with- 
out delay,  to  commence  the  works  necessary  for  such  an 
experiment,  and  to  be  prepared  to  set  to  work  at  the  moment 
determined  upon;  for,  if  they  should  suffer  this  4th  of 
December  to  go  by,  they  will  not  find  the  moon  again  under 
the  same  conditions  of  perigee  and  of  zenith  until  eigh- 
teen years  and  eleven  days  afterwards. 

"  The  Staff  of  the  Cambridge  Observatory  place  them- 
selves entirely  at  their  disposal  in  respect  of  all  questions 
of  theoretical  astronomy;  and  herewith  add  their  congratu- 
lations to  those  of  all  the  rest  of  America. 

"  For  the  Astronomical  Staff, 

"  J.  M.  Belfast, 
" Director  of  the  Observatory  of  Cambridge" 


CHAPTER   V 

THE  ROMANCE  OF  THE  MOON 

An  observer  endued  with  an  infinite  range  of  vision,  and 
placed  in  that  unknown  center  around  which  the  entire 
world  revolves,  might  have  beheld  myriads  of  atoms  filling 
all  space  during  the  chaotic  epoch  of  the  universe.  Little 
by  little,  as  ages  went  on,  a  change  took  place;  a  general 
law  of  attraction  manifested  itself,  to  which  the  hitherto 
errant  atoms  became  obedient;  these  atoms  combined  to- 
gether chemically  according  to  their  affinities,  formed  them- 
selves into  molecules,  and  composed  those  nebulous  masses 
with  which  the  depths  of  the  heavens  are  strewed. 

These  masses  became  immediately  endued  with  a  rotary 
motion  around  their  own  central  point.  This  center, 
formed  of  indefinite  molecules,  began  to  revolve  round  its 
axis  during  its  gradual  condensation;  then,  following  the 
immutable  laws  of  mechanics,  in  proportion  as  its  bulk 
diminished  by  condensation,  its  rotary  motion  became  ac- 
celerated, and  these  two  effects  continuing,  the  result  was 
the  formation  of  one  principal  star,  the  center  of  the  nebu- 
lous mass. 

By  attentively  watching,  the  observer  would  then  have 
perceived  the  other  molecules  of  the  mass,  following  the 
example  of  this  central  star,  become  likewise  condensed 
by  gradually  accelerated  rotation,  and  gravitating  round 
it  in  the  shape  of  innumerable  stars.  Thus  was  formed 
the  nebulcB,  of  which  astronomers  have  reckoned  up  nearly 
5,000. 

Amongst  these  5,000  nebulas  there  is  one  which  has  re- 
ceived the  name  of  the  Milky  Way,  and  which  contains 
eighteen  millions  of  stars,  each  of  which  has  become  the 
center  of  a  solar  world. 

If  the  observer  had  then  specially  directed  his  attention 
to  one  of  the  more  humble  and  less  brilliant  of  these  stellar 
bodies,  a  star  of  the  fourth  class,  that  which  is  arrogantly 
called  the  Sun,  all  the  phenomenon  to  which  the  formation 
of  the  Universe  is  to  be  ascribed  would  have  been  succes- 
sively fulfilled  before  his  eyes.  In  fact,  he  would  have 
perceived  this  sun,  as  yet  in  the  gaseous  state,  and  com- 
posed of  moving  molecules,  revolving  round  its  axis  in 
order  to  accomplish  its  work  of  concentration.     This  mo- 

1S1 


152       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

tion,  faithful  to  the  laws  of  mechanics,  would  have  been 
accelerated  with  the  diminution  of  its  volume;  and  a  mo- 
ment would  have  arrived  when  the  centrifugal  force  would 
have  overpowered  the  centripetal,  which  causes  the  mole- 
cules all  to  tend  towards  the  center. 

Another  phenomenon  would  now  have  passed  before  the 
observer's  eye,  and  the  molecules  situated  on  the  plane  of 
the  equator  escaping,  like  a  stone  from  a  sling  of  which 
the  cord  had  suddenly  snapped,  would  have  formed  around 
the  sun  sundry  concentric  rings  resembling  that  of  Saturn. 
In  their  turn,  again,  these  rings  of  cosmical  matter,  excited 
by  a  rotary  motion  round  the  central  mass,  would  have 
been  broken  up  and  decomposed  into  secondary  nebulosi- 
ties, that  is  to  say,  into  planets.  Similarly  he  would  have 
observed  these  planets  throw  off  one  or  more  rings  each, 
which  became  the  origin  of  the  secondary  bodies  which  we 
call  satellites. 

Thus,  then,  advancing  from  atom  to  molecule^  from 
molecule  to  nebulous  mass,  from  that  to  a  principal 
star,  from  star  to  sun,  from  sun  to  planet,  and  hence  to 
satellite,  we  have  the  whole  series  of  transformation  under- 
gone by  the  heavenly  bodies  during  the  first  days  of  the 
world. 

Now,  of  those  attendant  bodies  which  the  sun  maintains 
in  their  elliptical  orbits  by  the  great  law  of  gravitation, 
some  few  in  their  turn  possess  satellites.  Uranus  has 
eight,  Saturn  eight,  Jupiter  four,  Neptune  possibly  three, 
and  the  Earth  one.  This  last,  one  of  the  least  important 
of  the  entire  solar  system,  we  call  the  Moon;  and  it  is  she 
whom  the  daring  genius  of  the  Americans  professed  their 
intention  of  conquering. 

The  moon,  by  her  comparative  proximity,  and  the  con- 
stantly varying  appearances  produced  by  her  several  phases, 
has  always  occupied  a  considerable  share  of  the  attention  of 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth. 

From  the  time  of  Thales  of  Miletus,  in  the  fifth  century 
b.  c„  down  to  that  of  Copernicus  in  the  fifteenth  and  Tycho 
Brahe  in  the  sixteenth  century  a.  dv  observations  have  been 
from  time  to  time  carried  on  with  more  or  less  correctness, 
until  in  the  present  day  the  altitudes  of  the  lunar  mountains 
have  been  determined  with  exactitude.  Galileo  explained 
the  phenomena  of  the  lunar  light  produced  during  certain 


THE  ROMANCE  OF  THE  MOON  153 

of  her  phases  by  the  existence  of  mountains,  to  which  he 
assigned  a  mean  altitude  of  27,000  feet.  After  him 
Heveljus,  an  astronomer  of  Dantzic,  reduced  the  highest 
elevations  to  15,000  feet;  but  the  calculations  of  Riccioli 
brought  them  up  again  to  21,000  feet. 

At  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century  Herschell,  armed 
with  a  powerful  telescope,  considerably  reduced  the  pre- 
ceding measurements.  He  assigned  a  height  of  11,400 
feet  to  the  maximum  elevations,  and  reduced  the  mean  of 
the  different  altitudes  to  little  more  than  2,400  feet.  But 
Herschell's  calculations  were  in  their  turn  corrected  by  the 
observations  of  Halley,  Nasmyth,  Bianchini,  Gruithuysen, 
and  others;  but  it  was  reserved  for  the  labors  of  Boeer 
and  Msedler  finally  to  solve  the  question.  They  succeeded 
in  measuring  1,905  different  elevations,  of  which  six  ex- 
ceed 15,000  feet,  and  twenty-two  exceed  14,400  feet.  The 
highest  summit  of  all  towers  to  a  height  of  22,606  feet 
above  the  surface  of  the  lunar  disc.  At  the  same  period 
the  examination  of  the  moon  was  completed.  She  ap- 
peared completely  riddled  with  craters,  and  her  essentially 
volcanic  character  was  apparent  at  each  observation.  By 
the  absence  of  refraction  in  the  rays  of  the  planets  occulted 
by  her  we  conclude  that  she  is  absolutely  devoid  of  an  at- 
mosphere. The  absence  of  air  entails  the  absence  of  wa- 
ter. It  became,  therefore,  manifest  that  the  Selenites,  to 
support  life  under  such  conditions,  must  possess  a  special 
organization  of  their  own,  must  differ  remarkably  from 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth. 

At  length,  thanks  to  modern  art,  instruments  of  still 
higher  perfection  searched  the  moon  without  intermission, 
not  leaving  a  single  point  of  her  surface  unexplored;  and 
notwithstanding  that  her  diameter  measures  2,150  miles, 
her  surface  equals  the  i-i5th  part  of  that  of  our  globe,  and 
her  bulk  the  i-49th  part  of  that  of  the  terrestrial  spheroid 
— not  one  of  her  secrets  was  able  to  escape  the  eyes  of  the 
astronomers;  and  these  skillful  men  of  science  carried  to 
even  greater  degree  their  prodigious  observations. 

Thus  they  remarked  that,  during  full  moon,  the  disc 
appeared  scored  in  certain  parts  with  white  lines ;  and,  dur- 
ing the  phases,  with  black.  On  prosecuting  the  study  of 
these  with  still  greater  precision,  they  succeeded  in  obtain- 
ing an  exact  account  of  the  nature  of  these  lines.     They 


iS4       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

were  long  and  narrow  furrows  sunk  between  parallel 
ridges,  bordering  generally  upon  the  edges  of  the  craters. 
Their  length  varied  between  ten  and  ioo  miles,  and  their 
width  was  about  1,600  yards.  Astronomers  called  them 
chasms,  but  they  could  not  get  any  farther.  Whether 
these  chasms  were  the  dried-up  beds  of  ancient  rivers  or 
not  they  were  unable  thoroughly  to  ascertain. 

The  Americans,  amongst  others,  hoped  one  day  or  other 
to  determine  this  geological  question.  They  also  under- 
took to  examine  the  true  nature  of  that  system  of  parallel 
ramparts  discovered  on  the  moon's  surface  by  Gruithuysen, 
a  learned  professor  of  Munich,  who  considered  them  to  be 
"  a  system  of  fortifications  thrown  up  by  the  Selenitic  en- 
gineers." These  two  points,  yet  obscure,  as  well  as  others, 
no  doubt,  could  not  be  definitely  settled  except  by  direct 
communication  with  the  moon. 

Regarding  the  degree  of  intensity  of  its  light,  there  was 
nothing  more  to  learn  on  this  point.  It  was  known  that 
it  is  300,000  times  weaker  than  that  of  the  sun,  and  that 
its  heat  has  no  appreciable  effect  upon  the  thermometer. 
As  to  the  phenomenon  known  as  the  "  ashy  light,"  it  is  ex- 
plained naturally  by  the  effect  of  the  transmission  of  the 
solar  rays  from  the  earth  to  the  moon,  which  give  the  ap- 
pearance of  completeness  to  the  lunar  disc,  while  it  pre- 
sents itself  under  the  crescent  form  during  its  first  and  last 
phases. 

Such  was  the  state  of  knowledge  acquired  regarding  the 
earth's  satellite,  which  the  Gun  Club  undertook  to  perfect 
in  all  its  aspects,  cosmographic,  geological,  political,  and 
moral. 

CHAPTER   VI 

THE    PERMISSIVE    LIMITS    OF    IGNORANCE    AND    BELIEF    IN 
THE  UNITED  STATES 

The  immediate  results  of  Barbicane's  proposition  was  to 
place  upon  the  orders  of  the  day  all  the  astronomical  facts 
relative  to  the  Queen  of  Night.  Everybody  set  to  work 
to  study  assiduously.  One  would  have  thought  that  the 
moon  had  just  appeared  for  the  first  time,  and  that  no  one 
had  ever  before  caught  a  glimpse  of  her  in  the  heavens. 
The  papers  revived  all  the  old  anecdotes  in  which  the  "  sun 


LIMITS  OF  IGNORANCE  AND  BELIEF     155 

of  the  wolves"  played  a  part;  they  recalled  the  influences 
which  the  ignorance  of  past  ages  ascribed  to  her;  in  short, 
all  America  was  seized  with  seleno-mania,  or  had  become 
moon-mad. 

To  those  who  were  not  familiar  with  the  motions  of  the 
moon,  the  journals  demonstrated  that  she  possesses  two 
distinct  motions,  the  first  being  that  of  rotation  upon  her 
axis,  the  second  that  of  revolution  round  the  earth,  accom- 
plishing both  together  in  an  equal  period  of  time,  that  is 
to  say,  in  27  1-3  days. 

The  motion  of  rotation  is  that  which  produces  day  and 
night  on  the  surface  of  the  moon;  save  that  there  is  only 
one  day  and  one  night  in  the  lunar  month,  each  lasting 
354  1-3  hours.  But,  happily  for  her,  the  face  turned  to- 
wards the  terrestrial  globe  is  illuminated  by  it  with  an 
intensity  equal  to  the  light  of  fourteen  moons.  As  to  the 
other  face,  always  invisible  to  us,  it  has  of  necessity  354 
hours  of  absolute  night,  tempered  only  by  that  "  pale  glim- 
mer which  falls  upon  it  from  the  stars." 

Some  well-intentioned  but  rather  obstinate  persons, 
could  not  at  first  comprehend  how,  if  the  moon  displays  in- 
variably the  same  face  to  the  earth  during  her  revolution, 
she  can  describe  one  turn  round  herself.  To  such  they 
answered,  "  Go  into  your  dining-room,  and  walk  round 
the  table  in  such  a  way  as  always  to  keep  your  face  turned 
towards  the  center;  by  the  time  you  will  have  achieved  one 
complete  round  you  will  have  completed  one  turn  round 
yourself,  since  your  eye  will  have  traversed  successively 
every  point  of  the  room.  Well,  then,  the  room  is  the 
heavens,  the  table  is  the  earth,  and  the  moon  is  yourself." 
And  they  would  go  away  delighted. 

So,  then,  the  moon  displays  invariably  the  same  face  to 
the  earth ;  nevertheless,  to  be  quite  exact,  it  is  necessary  to 
add  that,  in  consequence  of  certain  fluctuations  of  north 
and  south,  and  of  west  and  east,  termed  her  libration,  she 
permits  rather  more  than  the  half,  that  is  to  say,  four-sev- 
enths, to  be  seen. 

As  soon  as  the  ignoramuses  came  to  understand  as  much 
as  the  Director  of  the  Observatory  himself  knew,  they  be- 
gan to  worry  themselves  regarding  her  revolution  round 
the  earth,  whereupon  twenty  scientific  reviews  immediately 
came  to  the  rescue.     They  pointed  out  to  them  then  that 


156       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

the  firmament,  with  its  infinitude  of  stars,  may  be  consid- 
ered as  one  vast  dial-plate,  upon  which  the  moon  travels, 
indicating  the  true  time  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth; 
that  it  is  during  this  movement  that  the  Queen  of  Night 
exhibits  her  dfferent  phases ;  that  the  moon  is  full  when  she 
is  in  opposition  with  the  sun,  that  is,  when  the  three  bodies 
are  on  the  same  straight  line,  the  earth  occupying  the  cen- 
ter ;  that  she  is  new  when  she  is  in  conjunction  with  the  sun, 
that  is,  when  she  is  between  it  and  the  earth;  and  lastly, 
that  she  is  in  her  first  or  last  quarter,  when  she  makes  with 
the  sun  and  the  earth  an  angle  of  which  she  herself  occu- 
pies the  apex. 

Regarding  the  altitude  which  the  moon  attains  above  the 
horizon,  the  letter  of  the  Cambridge  Observatory  had  said 
all  that  was  to  be  said  in  that  respect.  Everyone  knew  that 
this  altitude  varies  according  to  the  latitude  of  the  observer. 
But  the  only  zones  of  the  globe  in  which  the  moon  passes 
the  zenith,  that  is,  the  point  directly  over  the  head  of  the 
spectator,  are  of  necessity  comprised  between  the  twenty- 
eighth  parallels  and  the  equator.  Hence  the  importance  of 
the  advice  to  try  the  experiment  upon  some  point  of  that 
part  of  the  globe,  in  order  that  the  projectile  might  be  dis- 
charged perpendicularly,  and  so  the  soonest  escape  the 
action  of  gravitation.  This  was  an  essential  condition  to 
the  success  of  the  enterprise,  and  continued  actively  to  en- 
gage the  public  attention. 

Such  then  was  the  extent  of  knowledge  possessed  by 
every  American  on  the  subject,  and  of  which  no  one  could 
decently  profess  ignorance.  Still,  while  these  true  princi- 
ples were  being  rapidly  disseminated  many  errors  and  il- 
lusory fears  proved  less  easy  to  eradicate. 

For  instance,  some  worthy  persons  maintained  that  the 
moon  was  an  ancient  comet  which,  in  describing  its 
elongated  orbit  round  the  sun,  happened  to  pass  near  the 
earth,  and  became  confined  within  her  circle  of  attraction. 
These  drawing-room  astronomers  professed  so  to  explain 
the  charred  aspect  of  the  moon — a  disaster  which  they  at- 
tributed to  the  intensity  of  the  solar  heat;  only,  on  being 
reminded  that  comets  have  an  atmosphere,  and  that  the 
moon  has  little  or  none,  they  were  fairly  at  a  loss  for  a 
reply. 

Others  again,  belonging  to  the  doubting  class,  expressed 


LIMITS  OF  IGNORANCE  AND  BELIEF     157 

certain  fears  as  to  the  position  of  the  moon.  They  had 
heard  it  said  that,  according  to  observations  made  in  the 
time  of  the  Caliphs,  her  revolution  had  become  accelerated 
in  a  certain  degree.  Hence  they  concluded,  logically 
enough,  that  an  acceleration  of  motion  ought  to  be  accom- 
panied by  a  corresponding  diminution  in  the  distance  sep- 
arating the  two  bodies ;  and  that,  supposing  the  double  effect 
to  be  continued  to  infinity,  the  moon  would  end  by  one  day 
falling  into  the  earth.  However,  they  became  reassured 
as  to  the  fate  of  future  generations  on  being  apprised  that, 
according  to  the  calculations  of  Laplace,  this  acceleration 
of  motion  is  confined  within  very  restricted  limits,  and  that 
a  proportional  diminution  of  speed  will  be  certain  to  suc- 
ceed it.  So,  then,  the  stability  of  the  solar  system  would 
not  be  deranged  in  ages  to  come. 

There  remains  but  the  third  class,  the  superstitious. 
These  worthies  were  not  content  merely  to  rest  in  ignor- 
ance; they  must  know  all  about  things  which  had  no  ex- 
istence whatever,  and  as  to  the  moon,  they  had  long  known 
all  about  her.  One  set  regarded  her  disc  as  a  polished 
mirror,  by  means  of  which  people  could  see  each  other  from 
different  points  of  the  earth  and  interchange  their  thoughts. 
Another  set  pretended  that  out  of  one  thousand  new  moons 
that  had  been  observed,  nine  hundred  and  fifty  had  been 
attended  with  remarkable  disturbances,  such  as  cataclysms, 
revolutions,  earthquakes,  the  deluge,  etc.  Then  they  be- 
lieved in  some  mysterious  influence  exercised  by  her  over 
human  destinies — that  every  Selenite  was  attached  to  some 
inhabitant  of  the  earth  by  a  tie  of  sympathy;  they  main- 
tained that  the  entire  vital  system  is  subject  to  her  control, 
etc.,  etc.  But  in  time  the  majority  renounced  these  vulgar 
errors,  and  espoused  the  true  side  of  the  question.  As  for 
the  Yankees,  they  had  no  other  ambition  than  to  take  pos- 
session of  this  new  continent  of  the  sky,  and  to  plant  upon 
the  summit  of  its  highest  elevation  the  star-spangled  banner 
of  the  United  States  of  America. 


CHAPTER  VII 

THE  HYMN  OF  THE  CANNON-BALL 

The  Observatory  of  Cambridge  in  its  memorable  letter 
had  treated  the  question  from  a  purely  astronomical  point 
of  view.     The  mechanical  part  still  remained. 

President  Barbicane  had,  without  loss  of  time,  nomi- 
nated a  Working  Committee  of  the  Gun  Club.  The  duty 
of  this  Committee  was  to  resolve  the  three  grand  questions 
of  the  cannon,  the  projectile,  and  the  powder.  It  was  com- 
posed of  four  members  of  great  technical  knowledge,  Barbi- 
cane (with  a  casting  vote  in  case  of  equality),  General 
Morgan,  Major  Elphinstone,  and  J.  T.  Maston,  to  whom 
were  confided  the  functions  of  secretary.  On  the  8th  of 
October  the  Committee  met  at  the  house  of  President  Barbi- 
cane, 3  Republican  Street.  The  meeting  was  opened  by 
the  president  himself. 

"  Gentlemen,"  said  he,  "  we  have  to  resolve  one  of  the 
most  important  problems  in  the  whole  of  the  noble  science 
of  gunnery.  It  might  appear,  perhaps,  the  most  logical 
course  to  devote  our  first  meeting  to  the  discussion  of  the 
engine  to  be  employed.  Nevertheless,  after  mature  consid- 
eration, it  has  appeared  to  me  that  the  question  of  the 
projectile  must  take  precedence  of  that  of  the  cannon,  and 
that  the  dimensions  of  the  latter  must  necessarily  depend 
upon  those  of  the  former." 

"  Suffer  me  to  say  a  word,"  here  broke  in  J.  T.  Maston. 
Permission  having  been  granted,  "  Gentlemen,"  said  he, 
with  an  inspired  accent,  "  our  president  is  right  in  placing 
the  question  of  the  projectile  above  all  others.  The  ball 
we  are  about  to  discharge  at  the  moon  is  our  ambassador  to 
her,  and  I  wish  to  consider  it  from  a  moral  point  of  view. 
The  cannon-ball,  gentlemen,  to  my  mind,  is  the  most  mag- 
nificent manifestation  of  human  power.  If  Providence 
has  created  the  stars  and  the  planets,  man  has  called  the 
cannon-ball  into  existence.  Let  Providence  claim  the 
swiftness  of  electricity  and  of  light,  of  the  stars,  the  com- 
ets, and  the  planets,  of  wind  and  sound — we  claim  to  have 
invented  the  swiftness  of  the  cannon-ball,  a  hundred  times 
superior  to  that  of  the  swiftest  horses  or  railway  train. 
How  glorious  will  be  the  moment  when,  infinitely  exceed- 
ing all  hitherto  attained  velocities,  we  shall  launch  our  new 

158 


THE  HYMN  OF  THE  CANNON-BALL       159 

projectile  with  the  rapidity  of  seven  miles  a  second! 
Shall  it  not,  gentlemen — shall  it  not  be  received  up  there 
with  the  honors  due  to  a  terrestrial  ambassador?  " 

Overcome  with  emotion  the  orator  sat  down  and  applied 
himself  to  a  huge  plate  of  sandwiches  before  him. 

"  And  now,"  said  Barbicane,  "  let  us  quit  the  domain  of 
poetry  and  come  direct  to  the  question." 

"  By  all  means,"  replied  the  members. 

"  The  problem  before  us,"  continued  the  president,  "  is 
how  to  communicate  to  a  projectile  a  velocity  of  12,000 
yards  per  second.  Let  us  at  present  examine  the  velocities 
hitherto  attained.  General  Morgan  will  be  able  to  enlighten 
us  on  this  point." 

"  And  the  more  easily,"  replied  the  general,  "  that  during 
the  war  I  was  a  member  of  the  Committee  of  Experiments. 
I  may  say,  then,  that  the  100-pounder  Dahlgrens,  which 
carried  a  distance  of  5,000  yards,  impressed  upon  their 
projectile  an  initial  velocity  of  500  yards  a  second.  The 
Rodman  Columbiad  threw  a  shot  weighing  half  a  ton  a 
distance  of  six  miles,  with  a  velocity  of  800  yards  per 
second — a  result  which  Armstrong  and  Palisser  have  never 
obtained  in  England." 

"  This,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  is,  I  believe,  the  maximum 
velocity  ever  attained?" 

"  It  is  so,"  replied  the  general. 

"  Ah ! "  groaned  J.  T.  Maston,  "  if  my  mortar  had  not 
burst " 

"  Yes,"  quietly  replied  Barbicane,  "  but  it  did  burst.  We 
must  take,  then,  for  our  starting  point  this  velocity  of  800 
yards.  We  must  increase  it  fifteen-fold.  Now,  reserving 
for  another  discussion  the  means  of  producing  this  velocity, 
I  will  call  your  attention  to  the  dimensions  which  it  will 
be  proper  to  assign  to  the  shot.  You  understand  that  we 
have  nothing  to  do  here  with  projectiles  weighing  at  most 
but  half  a  ton." 

"  Why  not?  "  demanded  the  major. 

"  Because  the  shot,"  quickly  replied  J.  T.  Maston,  "  must 
be  big  enough  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  inhabitants 
of  the  moon,  if  there  are  any?  " 

"  Yes,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  and  for  another  reason  more 
important  still." 


i6o       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

"  What  mean  you?  "  asked  the  major. 

"  I  mean  that  it  is  not  enough  to  discharge  a  projectile, 
and  then  take  no  further  notice  of  it;  we  must  follow  it 
throughout  its  course,  up  to  the  moment  when  it  shall  reach 
its  goal." 

"  What  ?  "  shouted  the  general  and  the  major  in  great  sur- 
prise. 

"  Undoubtedly,"  replied  Barbicane,  composedly,  "  or  our 
experiment  would  produce  no  result." 

"But  then,"  replied  the  major,  "you  will  have  to  give 
this  projectile  enormous  dimensions." 

"  No !  Be  so  good  as  to  listen.  You  know  that  optical 
instruments  have  acquired  great  perfection;  with  certain 
telescopes  we  have  succeeded  in  obtaining  enlargements  of 
6,000  times  and  reducing  the  moon  to  within  forty  miles' 
distance.  Now,  at  this  distance,  any  objects  sixty  feet 
square  would  be  perfectly  visible.  If,  then,  the  penetrative 
power  of  telescopes  has  not  been  further  increased,  it  is 
because  that  power  detracts  from  their  light;  and  the  moon, 
which  is  but  a  reflecting  mirror,  does  not  give  back  suffi- 
cient light  to  enable  us  to  perceive  objects  of  lesser  magni- 
tude." 

"  Well,  then,  what  would  you  propose  to  do?"  asked  the 
general.  "  Would  you  give  your  projectile  a  diameter  of 
sixty  feet?" 

«  Not  so." 

"  Do  you  intend,  then,  to  increase  the  luminous  power 
of  the  moon  ?  " 

"  Exactly  so.  If  I  can  succeed  in  diminishing  the  den- 
sity of  the  atmosphere  through  which  the  moon's  light  has 
to  travel  I  shall  have  rendered  her  light  more  intense.  To 
effect  that  object  it  will  be  enough  to  establish  a  telescope 
on  some  elevated  mountain.    That  is  what  we  will  do." 

"  I  give  it  up,"  answered  the  major.  "  You  have  such 
a  way  of  simplifying  things.  And  what  enlargement  do 
you  expect  to  obtain  in  this  way  ?  " 

"One  of  48,000  times,  which  should  bring  the  moon 
within  an  apparent  distance  of  five  miles;  and,  in  order  to 
be  visible,  objects  need  not  have  a  diameter  of  more  than 
nine  feet." 

"  So,  then,"  cried  J.  T.  Maston,  "  our  projectile  need  not 
be  more  than  nine  feet  in  diameter." 

V.  Ill  Verne 


THE  HYMN  OF  THE  CANNON-BALL       161 

"  Let  me  observe,  however,"  interrupted  Major  Elphin- 
stone,  "  this  will  involve  a  weight  such  as " 

"  My  dear  major,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  before  discussing 
its  weight,  permit  me  to  enumerate  some  of  the  marvels 
which  our  ancestors  have  achieved  in  this  respect.  I  don't 
mean  to  pretend  that  the  science  of  gunnery  has  not  ad- 
vanced, but  it  is  as  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  during  the 
middle  ages  they  obtained  results  more  surprising,  I  will 
venture  to  say,  than  ours.  For  instance,  during  the  siege 
of  Constantinople  by  Mahomet  II,  in  1453,  stone  snot  oi 
1,900  lbs.  weight  were  employed.  At  Malta,  in  the  time  of 
the  Knights,  there  was  a  gun  of  the  fortress  of  St.  Elmo 
which  threw  a  projectile  weighing  2,500  lbs.  And,  now, 
what  is  the  extent  of  what  we  have  seen  ourselves  ?  Arm- 
strong guns  discharging  shot  of  500  lbs.,  and  the  Rodman 
guns  projectiles  of  half  a  ton!  It  seems,  then,  that  if  pro- 
jectiles have  gained  in  range,  they  have  lost  far  more  in 
weight.  Now,  if  we  turn  our  efforts  in  that  direction,  we 
ought  to  arrive,  with  the  progress  of  science,  at  ten  times 
the  weight  of  the  shot  of  Mahomet  II  and  the  Knights  of 
Malta." 

"Clearly,"  replied  the  major;  "but  what  metal  do  you 
calculate  upon  employing?" 

"  Simply  cast  iron,"  said  General  Morgan. 

"But,"  interrupted  the  major,  "since  the  weight  of  a 
shot  is  proportionate  to  its  volume,  an  iron  ball  of  nine  feet 
in  diameter  would  be  of  tremendous  weight." 

"  Yes,  if  it  were  solid,  not  if  it  were  hollow." 

"  Hollow?  then  it  would  be  a  shell?  " 

"  Yes,  a  shell,"  replied  Barbicane ;  "  decidedly  it  must  be. 
A  solid  shot  of  108  inches  would  weigh  more  than  200,000 
lbs.,  a  weight  evidently  far  too  great.  Still,  as  we  must 
reserve  a  certain  stability  for  our  projectile,  I  propose  to 
give  it  a  weight  of  20,000  lbs." 

"  What,  then,  will  be  the  thickness  of  the  sides  ?  "  asked 
the  major. 

"  If  we  follow  the  usual  proportions,"  replied  Morgan, 
"  a  diameter  of  108  inches  would  require  sides  of  two  feet 
thickness,  or  less." 

"  That  would  be  too  much,"  replied  Barbicane ;  "  for  you 
will  observe  that  the  question  is  not  that  of  a  shot  intended 
to  pierce  an  iron  plate :  it  will  suffice,  therefore,  to  give  it 


i62       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

sides  strong  enough  to  resist  the  pressure  of  the  gas.  The 
problem,  therefore,  is  this — what  thickness  ought  a  cast- 
iron  shell  to  have  in  order  not  to  weigh  more  than  20,000 
lbs.  ?  Our  clever  secretary  will  soon  enlighten  us  upon  this 
point." 

"Nothing  easier,"  replied  the  worthy  secretary  of  the 
Committee ;  and,  rapidly  tracing  a  few  algebraical  formulae 
upon  paper,  among  which  ri*  and  x7,  frequently  appeared,  he 
presently  said: 

"  The  sides  will  require  a  thickness  of  less  than  two 
inches." 

"  Will  that  be  enough?  "  asked  the  major  doubtfully. 

"Clearly  not!"  replied  the  president. 

"  What  is  to  be  done,  then  ?  "  said  Elphinstone,  with  a 
puzzled  air. 

"  Employ  another  metal  instead  of  iron." 

"  Copper  ?  "  said  Morgan. 

"  No;  that  would  be  too  heavy.    I  have  better  to  offer." 

"  What  then?  "  asked  the  major. 

"  Aluminium ! "  replied  Barbicane. 

"  Aluminium  ?  "  cried  his  three  colleagues  in  chorus. 

"  Unquestionably,  my  friends.  This  valuable  metal  pos- 
sesses the  whiteness  of  silver,  the  indestructibility  of  gold, 
the  tenacity  of  iron,  the  fusibility  of  copper,  the  lightness 
of  glass.  It  is  easily  wrought,  is  very  widely  distributed, 
forming  the  base  of  most  of  the  rocks,  is  three  times  lighter 
than  iron,  and  seems  to  have  been  created  for  the  express 
purpose  of  furnishing  us  with  the  material  for  our  projec- 
tile." 

"  But,  my  dear  president,"  said  the  major,  "  is  not  the 
cost  price  of  aluminium  extremely  high?  " 

"  It  was  so  at  its  first  discovery,  but  it  has  fallen  now  to 
nine  dollars  the  pound." 

"But  still,  nine  dollars  the  pound!"  replied  the  major, 
who  was  not  willing  readily  to  give  in;  "even  that  is  an 
enormous  price." 

"Undoubtedly,  major;  but  not  beyond  our  reach." 

"What  will  the  projectile  weigh  then?"  asked  Morgan. 

"  Here  is  the  result  of  my  calculations,"  replied  Barbi- 
cane. "A  shot  of  108  inches  in  diameter,  12  inches  in 
thickness,  would  weigh,  in  cast-iron  67,440  lbs.;  cast  in 
aluminium,  its  weight  will  be  reduced  to  19,250  lbs." 


THE  HYMN  OF  THE  CANNON-BALL      163 

"  Capital! "  cried  the  major;  "but  do  you  know  that,  at 
nine  dollars  the  pound,  this  projectile  will  cost " 

"  One  hundred  and  seventy-three  thousand  and  fifty  dol- 
lars ($173,050.)  I  know  it  quite  well.  But  fear  not,  my 
friends;  the  money  will  not  be  wanting  for  our  enterprise, 
I  will  answer  for  it.  Now  what  say  you  to  aluminium, 
gentlemen?  " 

"  Adopted ! "  replied  the  three  members  of  the  commit- 
tee. 

So  ended  the  first  meeting.  The  question  of  the  pro- 
jectile was  definitively  settled. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

HISTORY  OF  THE  CANNON 

The  resolutions  passed  at  the  last  meeting  produced  a 
great  effect  out  of  doors.  Timid  people  took  fright  at  the 
idea  of  a  shot  weighing  20,000  lbs.  being  launched  into 
space;  they  asked  what  cannon  could  ever  transmit  a  suffi- 
cient velocity  to  such  a  mighty  mass.  The  minutes  of  the 
second  meeting  were  destined  triumphantly  to  answer  such 
questions.  The  following  evening  the  discussion  was  re- 
newed. 

"  My  dear  colleagues,"  said  Barbicane,  without  further 
preamble,  "  the  subject  now  before  us  is  the  construction 
of  the  engine,  its  length,  its  composition,  and  its  weight. 
It  is  probable  that  we  shall  end  by  giving  it  gigantic  dimen- 
sions ;  but  however  great  may  be  the  difficulties  in  the  way, 
our  mechanical  genius  will  readily  surmount  them.  Be 
good  enough,  then,  to  give  me  your  attention,  and  do  not 
hesitate  to  make  objections  at  the  close.  I  have  no  fear 
of  them.  The  problem  before  us  is  how  to  communicate 
an  initial  force  of  12,000  yards  per  second  to  a  shell  of  108 
inches  in  diameter,  weighing  20,000  lbs.  Now  when  a  pro- 
jectile is  launched  into  space,  what  happens  to  it?  It  is 
acted  upon  by  three  independent  forces,  the  resistance  of 
the  air,  the  attraction  of  the  earth,  and  the  force  of  impul- 
sion with  which  it  is  endowed.  Let  us  examine  these  three 
forces.  The  resistance  of  the  air  is  of  little  importance. 
The  atmosphere  of  the  earth  does  not  exceed  forty  miles. 
Now  with  the  given  rapidity,  the  projectile  will  have  tra- 


164       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

versed  this  in  five  seconds,  and  the  period  is  too  brief  for 
the  resistance  of  the  medium  to  be  regarded  otherwise  than 
as  insignificant.  Proceeding,  then,  to  the  attraction  of  the 
earth,  that  is,  the  weight  of  the  shell,  we  know  that  this 
weight  will  diminish  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  square  of  the 
distance.  When  a  body  left  to  itself  falls  to  the  surface  of 
the  earth,  it  falls  five  feet  in  the  first  second;  and  if  the 
same  body  were  removed  257,542  miles  farther  off,  in 
other  words,  to  the  distance  of  the  moon,  its  fall  would  be 
reduced  to  about  half  a  line  in  the  first  second.  That  is 
almost  equivalent  to  a  state  of  perfect  rest.  Our  business, 
then,  is  to  overcome  progressively  this  action  of  gravitation. 
The  mode  of  accomplishing  that  is  by  the  force  of  impul- 
sion." 

"  There's  the  difficulty,"  broke  in  the  major. 

"True,"  replied  the  president;  "but  we  will  overcome 
that,  for  this  force  of  impulsion  will  depend  upon  the  length 
of  the  engine  and  the  powder  employed,  the  latter  being 
limited  only  by  the  resisting  power  of  the  former.  Our 
business,  then,  to-day,  is  with  the  dimensions  of  the  cannon." 

"  Now,  up  to  the  present  time,"  said  Barbicane,  "  our 
longest  guns  have  not  exceeded  twenty-five  feet  in  length. 
We  shall,  therefore,  astonish  the  world  by  the  dimensions 
we  shall  be  obliged  to  adopt.  It  must  evidently  be,  then, 
a  gun  of  great  range,  since  the  length  of  the  piece  will  in- 
crease the  detention  of  the  gas  accumulated  behind  the  pro- 
jectile ;  but  there  is  no  advantage  in  passing  certain  limits." 

"  Quite  so,"  said  the  major.  "  What  is  the  rule  in  such 
a  case?" 

"  Ordinarily  the  length  of  a  gun  is  20  to  25  times  the 
diameter  of  the  shot,  and  its  weight  235  to  240  times  that 
of  the  shot." 

"  That  is  not  enough,"  cried  J.  T.  Maston  impetuously. 

"  I  agree  with  you,  my  good  friend ;  and,  in  fact,  follow- 
ing this  proportion  for  a  projectile  nine  feet  in  diameter, 
weighing  30,000  lbs.,  the  gun  would  only  have  a  length  of 
225  feet,  and  a  weight  of  7,200,000  lbs." 

"  Ridiculous !  "  rejoined  Maston.  "  As  well  take  a  pis- 
tol." 

"  I  think  so  too,"  replied  Barbicane ;  "  that  is  why  I  pro- 
pose to  quadruple  that  length,  and  to  construct  a  gun  of  900 
feet." 


HISTORY  OF  THE  CANNON  165 

The  general  and  the  major  offered  some  objections; 
nevertheless,  the  proposition,  actively  supported  by  the  sec- 
retary, was  definitively  adopted. 

"  What  thickness  must  we  give  it  ?  "  asked  Elphinstone. 

"  A  thickness  of  six  feet,"  replied  Barbicane. 

"  You  surely  don't  think  of  mounting  a  mass  like  that 
upon  a  carriage?  "  asked  the  major. 

"  It  would  be  a  superb  idea,  though,"  said  Maston. 

"  But  impracticable,"  replied  Barbicane.  "  No ;  I  think  of 
sinking  this  engine  in  the  earth  alone,  binding  it  with  hoops 
of  wrought  iron,  and  finally  surrounding  it  with  a  thick  mass 
of  masonry  of  stone  and  cement.  The  piece  once  cast,  it 
must  be  bored  with  great  precision,  so  as  to  preclude  any 
possible  windage.  So  there  will  be  no  loss  whatever  of  gas, 
and  all  the  expansive  force  of  the  powder  will  be  employed 
in  the  propulsion." 

"  One  simple  question,"  said  Elphinstone :  "  is  our  gun 
to  be  rifled  ?  " 

"  No,  certainly  not,"  replied  Barbicane ;  "  we  require  an 
enormous  initial  velocity;  and  you  are  well  aware  that  a 
shot  quits  a  rifled  gun  less  rapidly  than  it  does  a  smooth 
bore." 

"  True,"  rejoined  the  major. 

The  committee  here  adjourned  for  a  few  minutes  to  tea 
and  sandwiches. 

On  the  discussion  being  renewed,  "  Gentlemen,"  said 
Barbicane,  "  we  must  now  take  into  consideration  the  metal 
to  be  employed.  Our  cannon  must  be  possessed  of  great 
tenacity,  great  hardness,  be  infusible  by  heat,  indissoluble, 
and  inoxydable  by  the  corrosive  action  of  acids." 

"  There  is  no  doubt  about  that,"  replied  the  major ;  "  and 
as  we  shall  have  to  employ  an  immense  quantity  of  metal, 
we  shall  not  be  at  a  loss  for  choice." 

"  Well,  then,"  said  Morgan,  "  I  propose  the  best  alloy 
hitherto  known,  which  consists  of  100  parts  of  copper,  12 
of  tin,  and  6  of  brass." 

"  I  admit,"  replied  the  president,  "  that  this  composition 
has  yielded  excellent  results,  but  in  the  present  case  it  would 
be  too  expensive,  and  very  difficult  to  work.  I  think,  then, 
that  we  ought  to  adopt  a  material  excellent  in  its  way  and 
of  low  price,  such  as  cast  iron.  What  is  your  advice, 
major?" 


i<56       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

"  I  quite  agree  with  you,"  replied  Elphinstone. 

"  In  fact,"  continued  Barbicane,  "  cast  iron  costs  ten 
times  less  than  bronze;  it  is  easy  to  cast,  it  runs  readily 
from  the  molds  of  sand,  it  is  easy  of  manipulation,  it  is  at 
once  economical  of  money  and  of  time.  In  addition,  it  is 
excellent  as  a  material,  and  I  well  remember  that  during  the 
war,  at  the  siege  of  Atlanta,  some  iron  guns  fired  one 
thousand  rounds  at  intervals  of  twenty  minutes  without  in- 
jury." 

"Cast  iron  is  very  brittle,  though,"  replied  Morgan. 

"  Yes,  but  it  possesses  great  resistance.  I  will  now  ask 
our  worthy  secretary  to  calculate  the  weight  of  a  cast-iron 
gun  with  a  bore  of  nine  feet  and  a  thickness  of  six  feet 
of  metal." 

"  In  a  moment,"  replied  Maston.  Then,  dashing  off  some 
algebraical  formulae  with  marvelous  facility,  in  a  minute 
or  two  he  declared  the  following  result : 

"  The  cannon  will  weigh  68,040  tons.  And,  at  two  cents 
a  pound,  it  will  cost ?  " 

"2,510,701  dollars." 

Maston,  the  major,  and  the  general  regarded  Barbicane 
with  uneasy  looks. 

"  Well,  gentlemen,"  replied  the  president,  "  I  repeat  what 
I  said  yesterday.  Make  yourselves  easy;  the  millions  will 
not  be  wanting." 

With  this  assurance  of  their  president  the  committee 
separated,  after  having  fixed  their  third  meeting  for  the 
following  evening. 


CHAPTER  IX 

THE  QUESTION  OF  THE  POWDERS 

There  remained  for  consideration  merely  the  question 
of  powders.  The  public  awaited  with  interest  its  final 
decision.  The  size  of  the  projectile,  the  length  of  the  can- 
non being  settled,  what  would  be  the  quantity  of  powder 
necessary  to  produce  impulsion? 

It  is  generally  asserted  that  gunpowder  was  invented  in 
the  fourteenth  century  by  the  monk  Schwartz,  who  paid  for 
his  grand  discovery  with  his  life.  It  is,  however,  pretty 
well  proved  that  this  story  ought  to  be  ranked  amongst  the 


THE  QUESTION  OF  THE  POWDERS       167 

legends  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Gunpowder  was  not  invented 
by  anyone;  it  was  the  lineal  successor  of  the  Greek  fire, 
which,  like  itself,  was  composed  of  sulphur  and  saltpetre. 
Few  persons  are  acquainted  with  the  mechanical  power  of 
gunpowder.  Now  this  is  precisely  what  is  necessary  to  be 
understood  in  order  to  comprehend  the  importance  of  the 
question  submitted  to  the  committee. 

A  litre  of  gunpowder  weighs  about  2  lbs.;  during  com- 
bustion it  produces  400  litres  of  gas.  This  gas,  on  being 
liberated  and  acted  upon  by  a  temperature  raised  to  2,400 
degrees,  occupies  a  space  of  4,000  litres;  consequently  the 
volume  of  powder  is  to  be  the  volume  of  gas  produced  by 
its  combustion  as  1  to  4,000.  One  may  judge,  therefore, 
of  the  tremendous  pressure  of  this  gas  when  compressed 
within  a  space  of  4,000  times  too  confined.  All  this  was,  of 
course,  well  known  to  the  members  of  the  committee  when 
they  met  on  the  following  evening. 

The  first  speaker  on  this  occasion  was  Major  Elphinstone, 
who  had  been  the  director  of  the  gunpowder  factories  dur- 
ing the  war. 

"  Gentlemen,"  said  this  distinguished  chemist,  "  I  begin 
with  some  figures  which  will  serve  as  the  basis  of  our  calcu- 
lation. The  old  24-pounder  shot  required  for  its  discharge 
16  lbs.  of  powder." 

"  You  are  certain  of  the  amount?  "  broke  in  Barbicane. 

"Quite  certain,"  replied  the  major.  "The  Armstrong 
cannon  employs  only  75  lbs.  of  powder  for  a  projectile 
of  800  lbs.,  and  the  Rodman  Columbiad  uses  only  160  lbs. 
of  powder  to  send  its  half-ton  shot  a  distance  of  six  miles. 
These  facts  cannot  be  called  in  question,  for  I  myself  raised 
the  point  during  the  depositions  taken  before  the  Com- 
mittee of  Artillery." 

"  Quite  true,"  said  the  general. 

"Well,"  replied  the  major,  "these  figures  go  to  prove 
that  the  quantity  of  powder  is  not  increased  with  the  weight 
of  the  shot;  that  is  to  say,  if  a  24-pounder  shot  requires 
16  lbs.  of  powder; — in  other  words,  if  in  ordinary  guns  we 
employ  a  quantity  of  powder  equal  to  two-thirds  of  the 
weight  of  the  projectile,  this  proportion  is  not  constant. 
Calculate,  and  you  will  see  that  in  place  of  333  lbs.  of  pow- 
der, the  quantity  is  reduced  to  no  more  than  160  lbs." 

"  What  are  you  aiming  at?"  asked  the  president. 


i68      FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

"  If  you  push  your  theory  to  extremes,  my  dear  major," 
said  J.  T.  Maston,  "  you  will  get  to  this,  that  as  soon  as 
your  shot  becomes  sufficiently  heavy  you  will  not  require 
any  powder  at  all." 

"  Our  friend  Maston  is  always  at  his  jokes,  even  in  seri- 
ous matters,"  cried  the  major;  "  but  let  him  make  his  mind 
easy,  I  am  going  presently  to  propose  gunpowder  enough 
to  satisfy  his  artillerist's  propensities,  I  only  keep  to  statisti- 
cal facts  when  I  say  that  during  the  war,  and  for  the  very 
largest  guns,  the  weight  of  powder  was  reduced,  as  the 
result  of  experience,  to  a  tenth  part  of  the  weight  of  the 
shot." 

"  Perfectly  correct,"  said  Morgan;  "but  before  deciding 
the  quantity  of  powder  necessary  to  give  the  impulse,  I 
think  it  would  be  as  well " 

"  We  shall  have  to  employ  a  large-grained  powder,"  con- 
tinued the  major,  "  its  combustion  is  more  rapid  than  that 
of  the  small." 

"  No  doubt  about  that,"  replied  Morgan,  "  but  it  is  very 
destructive,  and  ends  by  enlarging  the  bore  of  the  pieces." 

"  Granted ;  but  that  which  is  injurious  to  a  gun  destined 
to  perform  long  service  is  not  so  to  our  Columbiad.  We 
shall  run  no  danger  of  an  explosion;  and  it  is  necessary  that 
our  powder  should  take  fire  instantaneously  in  order  that 
its  mechanical  effect  may  be  complete." 

"  We  must  have,"  said  Maston,  "  several  touch-holes,  so 
as  to  fire  it  at  different  points  at  the  same  time." 

"  Certainly,"  replied  Elphinstone ;  "  but  that  will  render 
the  working  of  the  piece  more  difficult.  I  return  then  to 
my  large-grained  powder,  which  removes  those  difficulties. 
In  his  Columbiad  charges  Rodman  employed  a  powder  as 
large  as  chestnuts,  made  of  willow  charcoal,  simply  dried 
in  cast-iron  pans.  This  powder  was  hard  and  glittering, 
left  no  trace  upon  the  hand,  contained  hydrogen  and  oxy- 
gen in  large  proportion,  took  fire  instantaneously,  and,  al- 
though very  destructive,  did  not  injure  the  mouth-piece." 

Up  to  this  point  Barbicane  had  kept  aloof  from  the  dis- 
cussion; he  left  the  others  to  speak  while  he  himself  listened; 
he  had  evidently  got  an  idea.  He  now  simply  said,  "  Well, 
my  friends,  what  quantity  of  powder  do  you  propose?" 

The  three  members  looked  at  one  another. 

"  Two  hundred  thousand  pounds,"  at  last  said  Morgan. 


THE  QUESTION  OF  THE  POWDERS       169 

"  Five  hundred  thousand,"  added  the  major. 

"Eight  hundred  thousand,"  screamed  Maston. 

A  moment  of  silence  followed  this  triple  proposal ;  it  was 
at  last  broken  by  the  president. 

"  Gentlemen,"  he  quietly  said,  "I  start  from  this  prin- 
ciple, that  the  resistance  of  a  gun,  constructed  under  the 
given  conditions,  is  unlimited.  I  shall  surprise  our  friend 
Maston,  then,  by  stigmatizing  his  calculations  as  timid ;  and 
I  propose  to  double  his  800,000  lbs.  of  powder." 

"Sixteen  hundred  thousand  pounds?"  shouted  Maston, 
leaping  from  his  seat. 

"Just  so." 

"  We  shall  have  to  come  then  to  my  ideal  of  a  cannori 
half  a  mile  long;  for  you  see  1,600,000  lbs.  will  occupy  a 
space  of  about  20,000  cubic  feet;  and  since  the  contents  of 
your  cannon  do  not  exceed  54,000  cubic  feet,  it  would  be 
half  full;  and  the  bore  will  not  be  more  than  long  enough 
for  the  gas  to  communicate  to  the  projectile  sufficient  im- 
pulse." 

"  Nevertheless,"  said  the  president,  "  I  hold  to  that  quan- 
tity of  powder.  Now,  1,600,000  lbs.  of  powder  will  create 
6,000,000,000  of  litres  of  gas.  Six  thousand  millions !  You 
quite  understand  ?  " 

"  What  is  to  be  done  then  ?  "  said  the  general. 

The  thing  is  very  simple;  we  must  reduce  this  enor- 
mous quantity  of  powder,  while  preserving  to  it  its  me- 
chanical power." 

"  Good ;  but  by  what  means  ?  " 

"I  am  going  to  tell  you,"  replied  Barbicane  quietly. 
"  Nothing  is  more  easy  than  to  reduce  this  mass  to  one- 
quarter  of  its  bulk.  You  know  that  curious  cellular  matter 
which  constitutes  the  elementary  tissues  of  vegetables?  This 
substance  is  found  quite  pure  in  many  bodies,  especially 
in  cotton,  which  is  nothing  more  than  the  down  of  the 
seeds  of  the  cotton  plant.  Now  cotton,  combined  with  cold 
nitric  acid,  becomes  transformed  into  a  substance  eminently 
insoluble,  combustible,  and  explosive.  It  was  first  dis- 
covered in  1832,  by  Braconnot,  a  French  chemist,  who 
called  it  xyloidine.  In  1838  another  Frenchman,  Pelouze, 
investigated  its  different  properties,  and  finally,  in  1846, 
Schonbein,  Professor  of  Chemistry  at  Bale,  proposed  its 
employment  for  purposes  of  war.    This  powder,  now  called 


i;o       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

pyroxyle,  or  fulminating  cotton,  is  prepared  with  great 
facility  by  simply  plunging  cotton  for  fifteen  minutes  in 
nitric  acid,  then  washing  it  in  water,  then  drying  it,  and  it 
is  ready  for  use." 

"  Nothing  could  be  more  simple,"  said  Morgan. 

"  Moreover,  pyroxyle  is  unaltered  by  moisture — a  valu- 
able property  to  us,  inasmuch  as  it  would  take  several  days 
to  charge  the  cannon.  It  ignites  at  170  degrees  in  place  of 
240,  and  its  combustion  is  so  rapid  that  one  may  set  light 
to  it  on  the  top  of  ordinary  powder,  without  the  latter 
having  time  to  ignite." 

"  Perfect !  "  exclaimed  the  major. 

"  Only  it  is  more  expensive." 

"  What  matter?  "  cried  J.  T.  Maston. 

"  Finally,  it  imparts  to  projectiles  a  velocity  four  times 
superior  to  that  of  gunpowder.  I  will  even  add,  that  if  we 
mix  with  it  one-eighth  of  its  own  weight  of  nitrate  of 
potass,  its  expansive  force  is  again  considerably  aug- 
mented." 

"Will  that  be  necessary?"  asked  the  major. 

"  I  think  not,"  replied  Barbicane.  "  So,  then,  in  place  of 
1,600,000  lbs.  of  powder,  we  shall  have  but  400,000  lbs.  of 
fulminating  cotton ;  and  since  we  can  without  danger,  com- 
press 500  lbs.  of  cotton  into  2.J  cubic  feet,  the  whole  quan- 
tity will  not  occupy  a  height  of  more  than  180  feet  within 
the  bore  of  the  Columbiad.  In  this  way  the  shot  will  have 
more  than  700  feet  of  bore  to  traverse  under  a  force  of 
6,000,000,000  litres  of  gas  before  taking  its  flight  towards 
the  moon." 

At  this  juncture  J.  T.  Maston  could  not  repress  his  emo- 
tion; he  flung  himself  into  the  arms  of  his  friend  with  the 
violence  of  a  projectile,  and  Barbicane  would  have  been 
stove  in  if  he  had  not  been  bomb-proof. 

This  incident  terminated  the  third  meeting  of  the  com- 
mittee. 

Barbicane  and  his  bold  colleagues,  to  whom  nothing 
seemed  impossible,  had  succeeded  in  solving  the  complex 
problems  of  projectile,  cannon,  and  powder.  Their  plan 
was  drawn  up,  and  it  only  remained  to  put  it  in  execution. 

"  A  mere  matter  of  detail,  a  bagatelle,"  said  J.  T.  Maston. 


CHAPTER  X 

ONE  ENEMY  AND  TWENTY-FIVE  MILLIONS  OF  FRIENDS 

The  American  public  took  a  lively  interest  in  the  small- 
est details  of  the  enterprise  of  the  Gun  Club.  It  followed 
day  by  day  the  discussions  of  the  committee.  The  most 
simple  preparation  for  the  great  experiment,  the  questions 
of  figures  which  it  involved,  the  mechanical  difficulties  to 
be  resolved — in  one  word,  the  entire  plan  of  work  roused 
the  popular  excitment  to  the  highest  pitch. 

The  purely  scientific  attraction  was  suddenly  intensified 
by  the  following  incident: 

We  have  seen  what  legions  of  admirers  and  friends 
Barbicane's  project  had  rallied  round  its  author.  There 
was,  however,  one  single  individual  alone  in  all  the  States 
of  the  Union  who  protested  against  the  attempt  of  the  Gun 
Club.  He  attacked  it  furiously  on  every  opportunity,  and 
human  nature  is  such  that  Barbicane  felt  more  keenly  the 
opposition  of  that  one  man  than  he  did  the  applause  of  all 
the  others.  He  was  well  aware  of  the  motive  of  this  antip- 
athy, the  origin  of  this  solitary  enmity,  the  cause  of  its 
personality  and  old  standing,  and  in  what  rivalry  of  self- 
love  it  had  its  rise. 

This  persevering  enemy  the  president  of  the  Gun  Club 
had  never  seen.  Fortunate  that  it  was  so,  for  a  meeting 
between  the  two  men  would  certainly  have  been  attended 
with  serious  consequences.  This  rival  was  a  man  of  science, 
like  Barbicane  himself,  of  a  fiery,  daring,  and  violent  dis- 
position; a  pure  Yankee.  His  name  was  Captain  Nicholl; 
he  lived  at  Philadelphia. 

Most  people  are  aware  of  the  curious  struggle  which 
arose  during  the  Federal  war  between  the  guns  and  the 
armor  of  iron-plated  ships.  The  result  was  the  entire  re- 
construction of  the  navy  of  both  the  continents ;  as  the  one 
grew  heavier,  the  other  became  thicker  in  proportion. 
The  Merrimac,  the  Monitor,  the  Tennessee,  the  Wee- 
hawken  discharged  enormous  projectiles  themselves,  after 
having  been  armor-clad  against  the  projectiles  of  others. 
In  fact  they  did  to  others  that  which  they  would  not  they 
should  do  to  them — that  grand  principle  of  immorality 
upon  which  rests  the  whole  art  of  war. 

Now  if  Barbicane  was  a  great  founder  of  shot,  Nichoil 
was  a  great  forger  of  plates;  the  one  cast  night  and  day  at 

171 


172       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

Baltimore,  the  other  forged  day  and  night  at  Philadelphia. 
As  soon  as  ever  Barbicane  invented  a  new  shot,  Nicholl  in- 
vented a  new  plate,  each  followed  a  current  of  ideas  essenti- 
ally opposed  to  the  other.  Happily  for  these  citizens,  so 
useful  to  their  country,  a  distance  of  from  fifty  to  sixty 
miles  separated  them  from  one  another,  and  they  had  never 
yet  met  Which  of  these  two  inventors  had  the  advantage 
over  the  other  it  was  difficult  to  decide  from  the  results 
obtained.  By  last  accounts,  however,  it  would  seem  that  the 
armor-plate  would  in  the  end  have  to  give  way  to  the  shot ; 
nevertheless,  there  were  competent  judges  who  had  their 
doubts  on  the  point. 

At  the  last  experiment  the  cylindro-conical  projectiles 
of  Barbicane  stuck  like  so  many  pins  in  the  Nicholl  plates. 
On  that  day  the  Philadelphia  iron-forger  then  believed  him- 
self victorious,  and  could  not  evince  contempt  enough  for 
his  rival;  but  when  the  other  afterwards  substituted  for 
conical  shot  simple  600  lb.  shells  at  very  moderate  velocity, 
the  captain  was  obliged  to  give  in.  In  fact,  these  projectiles 
knocked  his  best  metal  plate  to  shivers. 

Matters  were  at  this  stage,  and  victory  seemed  to  rest 
with  the  shot,  when  the  war  came  to  an  end  on  the  very 
day  when  Nicholl  had  completed  a  new  armor-plate  of 
wrought  steel.  It  was  a  masterpiece  of  its  kind,  and  bid  de- 
fiance to  all  the  projectiles  in  the  world.  The  captain  had 
it  conveyed  to  the  Polygon  at  Washington,  challenging  the 
president  of  the  Gun  Club  to  break  it.  Barbicane,  peace 
having  been  declared,  declined  to  try  the  experiment. 

Nicholl,  now  furious,  offered  to  expose  his  plate  to  the 
shock  of  any  shot,  solid,  hollow,  round,  or  conical.  Refused 
by  the  president  who  did  not  choose  to  compromise  his  last 
success. 

Nicholl,  disgusted  by  this  obstinacy,  tried  to  tempt  Barbi- 
cane by  offering  him  every  chance.  He  proposed  to  fix  the 
plate  within  two  hundred  yards  of  the  gun.  Barbicane  still 
obstinate  in  refusal.  A  hundred  yards  ?  Not  even  seventy- 
five! 

"  At  fifty  then ! "  roared  the  captain  through  the  news- 
papers.   "  At  twenty-five  yards ! !  and  I'll  stand  behind ! ! !  " 

Barbicane  returned  for  answer  that,  even  if  Captain 
Nicholl  would  be  so  good  as  to  stand  in  front,  he  would  not 
fire  any  more. 


ONE   ENEMY  173 

Nicholl  could  not  contain  himself  at  this  reply;  threw  out 
hints  of  cowardice;  that  a  man  who  refused  to  fire  a  can- 
non-shot was  pretty  near  being  afraid  of  it ;  that  artillerists 
who  fight  at  six  miles'  distance  are  substituting  mathemati- 
cal formulae  for  individual  courage. 

To  these  insinuations  Barbicane  returned  no  answer; 
perhaps  he  never  heard  of  them,  so  absorbed  was  he  in  the 
calculations  for  his  great  enterprise. 

When  his  famous  communication  was  made  to  the  Gun 
Club,  the  captain's  wrath  passed  all  bounds;  with  his  in- 
tense jealousy  was  mingled  a  feeling  of  absolute  impotence. 
How  was  he  to  invent  anything  to  beat  this  900-foot  Colum- 
biad?  What  armor-plate  could  ever  resist  a  projectile  of 
30,000  lbs.  weight?  Overwhelmed  at  first  under  this  violent 
shock,  he  by-and-by  recovered  himself,  and  resolved  to 
crush  the  proposal  by  the  weight  of  his  arguments. 

He  then  violently  attacked  the  labors  of  the  Gun  Club, 
published  a  number  of  letters  in  the  newspapers,  endeavored 
to  prove  Barbicane  ignorant  of  the  first  principles  of  gun- 
nery. He  maintained  that  it  was  absolutely  impossible  to 
impress  upon  any  body  whatever  a  velocity  of  12,000  yards 
per  second;  that  even  with  such  a  velocity  a  projectile  of 
such  a  weight  could  not  transcend  the  limits  of  the  earth's 
atmosphere.  Further  still,  even  regarding  the  velocity  to 
be  acquired,  and  granting  it  to  be  sufficient,  the  shell  could 
not  resist  the  pressure  of  the  gas  developed  by  the  ignition 
of  1,600,000  lbs.  of  powder;  and  supposing  it  to  resist  that 
pressure,  it  would  be  the  less  able  to  support  that  tempera- 
ture ;  it  would  melt  on  quitting  the  Columbiad,  and  fall  back 
in  a  red-hot  shower  upon  the  heads  of  the  imprudent  specta- 
tors. 

Barbicane  continued  his  work  without  regarding  these  at- 
tacks. 

Nicholl  then  took  up  the  question  in  its  other  aspects. 
Without  touching  upon  its  uselessness  in  all  points  of  view, 
he  regarded  the  experiment  as  fraught  with  extreme  danger, 
both  to  the  citizens,  who  might  sanction  by  their  presence 
so  reprehensible  a  spectacle,  and  also  to  the  towns  in  the 
neighborhood  of  this  deplorable  cannon.  He  also  observed 
that  if  the  projectile  did  not  succeed  in  reaching  its  destina- 
tion (a  result  absolutely  impossible),  it  must  inevitably 
fall  back  upon  the  earth,  and  that  the  shock  of  such  a  mass, 


174       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

multiplied  by  the  square  of  its  velocity,  would  seriously  en- 
danger every  point  of  the  globe.  Under  the  circumstances, 
therefore,  and  without  interfering  with  the  rights  of  free 
citizens,  it  was  a  case  for  the  intervention  of  the  Govern- 
ment, which  ought  not  to  endanger  the  safety  of  all  for  the 
pleasure  of  one  individual. 

Spite  of  all  his  arguments,  however,  Captain  Nicholl  re- 
mained alone  in  his  opinion.  Nobody  listened  to  him,  and 
he  did  not  succeed  in  alienating  a  single  admirer  from  the 
president  of  the  Gun  Club.  The  latter  did  not  even  take  the 
pains  to  refute  the  arguments  of  his  rival. 

Nicholl,  driven  into  his  last  entrenchments,  and  not  able 
to  fight  personally  in  the  cause,  resolved  to  fight  with 
money.  He  published,  therefore,  in  the  Richmond  Inquirer 
a  series  of  wagers,  conceived  in  these  terms,  and  on  an  in- 
creasing scale: 

No.  i  ( 1,000  dols.) — That  the  necessary  funds  for  the 
experiment  of  the  Gun  Club  will  not  be  forthcoming. 

No.  2  (2,000  dols.) — That  the  operation  of  casting 
a  cannon  of  900  feet  is  impracticable,  and  can  not 
possibly  succeed. 

No.  3  (3,000  dols.) — That  it  is  impossible  to  load  the 
Columbiad,  and  that  the  pyroxyle  will  take  fire  spon- 
taneously under  the  pressure  of  the  projectile. 

No.  4  (4,000  dols.) — That  the  Columbiad  will  burst 
at  the  first  fire. 

No.  5  (5,000  dols.)— That  the  shot  will  not  travel  far- 
ther than  six  miles,  and  that  it  will  fall  back  again 
a  few  seconds  after  its  discharge. 

^  It  was  an  important  sum,  therefore,  which  the  captain 
risked  in  his  invincible  obstinacy.  He  had  no  less  than 
15,000  dollars  at  stake. 

Notwithstanding  the  importance  of  the  challenge,  on  the 
19th  of  May  he  received  a  sealed  packet  containing  the  fol- 
lowing superbly  laconic  reply: 

"  Baltimore,  Oct.  19. 
"Done. 

"  Barbicane." 


CHAPTER  XI 

FLORIDA  AND  TEXAS 

One  question  yet  remained  to  be  decided :  it  was  neces- 
sary to  choose  a  favorable  spot  for  the  experiment.  Ac- 
cording to  the  advice  of  the  Observatory  of  Cambridge,  the 
gun  must  be  fired  perpendicularly  to  the  plane  of  the  horizon, 
that  is  to  say,  towards  the  zenith.  Now  the  moon  does  not 
traverse  the  zenith,  except  in  places  situated  between  o° 
and  28'  of  latitude.  It  became,  then,  necessary  to  determine 
exactly  that  spot  on  the  globe  where  the  immense  Colum- 
biad  should  be  cast. 

On  the  20th  of  October,  at  a  general  meeting  of  the 
Gun  Club,  Barbicane  produced  a  magnificent  map  of  the 
United  States.  "  Gentlemen,"  said  he,  in  opening  the  dis- 
cussion, "  I  presume  that  we  are  all  agreed  that  this  ex- 
periment can  not  and  ought  not  to  be  tried  anywhere  but 
within  the  limits  of  the  soil  of  the  Union.  Now,  by  good 
fortune,  certain  frontiers  of  the  United  States  extend  down- 
wards as  far  as  the  28th  parallel  of  the  north  latitude.  If 
you  will  cast  your  eye  over  this  map,  you  will  see  that  we 
have  at  our  disposal  the  whole  of  the  southern  portion  of 
Texas  and  Florida." 

It  was  finally  agreed,  then,  that  the  Columbiad  must  be 
cast  on  the  soil  of  either  Texas  or  Florida.  The  result, 
however,  of  this  decision  was  to  create  a  rivalry  entirely 
without  precedent  between  the  different  towns  of  these  two 
states. 

The  28th  parallel,  on  reaching  the  American  coast,  tra- 
verses the  peninsula  of  Florida,  dividing  it  into  two  nearly 
equal  portions.  Then,  plunging  into  the  Gulf  of  Mexico 
it  subtends  the  arc  formed  by  the  coast  of  Alabama,  Mississ- 
ippi, and  Louisiana;  then  skirting  Texas,  off  which  it  cuts 
an  angle,  it  continues  its  course  over  Mexico,  crosses  the 
Sonora,  Old  California,  and  loses  itself  in  the  Pacific  Ocean. 
It  was,  therefore,  only  those  portions  of  Texas  and  Florida 
which  were  situated  below  this  parallel  which  came  within 
the  prescribed  conditions  of  latitude. 

Florida,  in  its  southern  part,  reckons  no  cities  of  import- 
ance ;  it  is  simply  studded  with  forts  raised  against  the  rov- 
ing Indians.  One  solitary  town,  Tampa  Town,  was  able 
to  put  in  a  claim  in  favor  of  its  situation. 

In  Texas,  on  the  contrary,  the  towns  are  much  more 

175 


176       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

numerous  and  important.  Corpus  Christi,  in  the  county 
of  Nueces,  and  all  the  cities  situated  on  the  Rio  Bravo, 
Laredo,  Comalites,  San  Ignacio  on  the  Web,  Rio  Grande 
city  on  the  Starr,  Edinburgh  in  the  Hidalgo,  Santa  Rita, 
Elpanda,  Brownsville  in  the  Cameron,  formed  an  imposing 
league  against  the  pretensions  of  Florida.  So,  scarcely  was 
the  decision  known,  when  the  Texan  and  Floridan  deputies 
arrived  at  Baltimore  in  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time. 
From  that  very  moment  President  Barbicane  and  the  influ- 
ential members  of  the  Gun  Club  were  besieged  day  and  night 
by  formidable  claims.  If  seven  cities  of  Greece  contended 
for  the  honor  of  having  given  birth  to  Homer,  here  were 
two  entire  states  threatening  to  come  to  blows  about  the 
question  of  a  cannon. 

The  rival  parties  promenaded  the  streets  with  arms  in 
their  hands;  and  at  every  occasion  of  their  meeting  a  col- 
lision was  to  be  apprehended  which  might  have  been  at- 
tended with  disastrous  results.  Happily  the  prudence  and 
address  of  President  Barbicane  averted  the  danger.  These 
personal  demonstrations  found  a  division  in  the  newspapers 
of  the  different  states.  The  New  York  Herald  and 
the  Tribune  supported  Texas,  while  the  Times  and  the 
American  Review  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Floridan  Depu- 
ties. The  members  of  the  Gun  Club  could  not  decide  to 
which  to  give  the  preference. 

Texas  produced  its  array  of  twenty-six  counties;  Florida 
replied  that  twelve  counties  were  better  than  twenty-six  in 
a  country  only  one-sixth  of  the  size. 

Texas  plumed  itself  upon  its  330,000  natives;  Florida 
with  a  far  smaller  territory,  boasted  of  being  much  more 
densely  populated  with  56,000.  The  Texans,  through  the 
columns  of  the  Herald,  claimed  that  some  regard  should  be 
had  to  a  state  which  grew  the  best  cotton  in  all  America, 
produced  the  best  green  oak  for  the  service  of  the  navy, 
and  contained  the  finest  oil,  besides  iron  mines,  in  which 
the  yield  was  50  per  cent,  of  pure  metal. 

To  this  the  American  Review  replied  that  the  soil  of 
Florida,  although  not  equally  rich,  afforded  the  best  condi- 
tions for  the  molding  and  casting  of  the  Columbiad,  con- 
sisting as  it  did  of  sand  and  argillaceous  earth. 

"That  may  be  all  very  well,"  replied  the  Texans;  "but 
you  must  first  get  to  this  country.    Now  the  communications 

V.  Ill  Verne 


FLORIDA  AND  TEXAS  177 

with  Florida  are  difficult,  while  the  coast  of  Texas  offers 
the  bay  of  Galveston,  which  possesses  a  circumference  of 
fourteen  leagues,  and  is  capable  of  containing  the  navies 
of  the  entire  world !  " 

"  A  pretty  notion  truly,"  replied  the  papers  in  the  inter- 
est of  Florida,  "that  of  Galveston  Bay,  below  the  29J/1 
parallel!  Have  we  not  got  the  bay  of  Espiritu  Santo,  open- 
ing precisely  upon  the  28th  degree,  and  by  which  ships  can 
reach  Tampa  Town  by  direct  route?" 

"A  fine  bay!  half  choked  with  sand!" 

"  Choked  yourselves !  "  returned  the  others. 

Thus  the  war  went  on  for  several  days,  when  Florida 
endeavored  to  draw  her  adversary  away  onto  fresh  ground ; 
and  one  morning  the  Times  hinted  that,  the  enterprise  being 
essentially  American,  it  ought  not  to  be  attempted  upon 
other  than  purely  American  territory. 

To  these  words  Texas  retorted,  "  American !  are  we  not 
as  much  so  as  you?  Were  not  Texas  and  Florida  both  in- 
corporated into  the  Union  in  1845?" 

"Undoubtedly,"  replied  the  Times,  "but  we  have  be- 
longed to  the  Americans  ever  since  1820." 

"Yes!"  returned  the  Tribune;  "after  having  been 
Spaniards  or  English  for  200  years,  you  were  sold  to  the 
United  States  for  five  million  dollars ! " 

"Well!  and  why  need  we  blush  for  that?  Was  not 
Louisiana  bought  from  Napoleon  in  1803  at  the  price  of 
sixteen  million  dollars  ?  " 

"  Scandalous !  "  roared  the  Texan  deputies.  "  A  wretched 
little  strip  of  country  like  Florida  to  dare  to  compare  itself 
to  Texas,  who,  in  place  of  selling  herself,  asserted  her  own 
independence,  drove  out  the  Mexicans  in  March  2,  1836, 
and  declared  herself  a  federal  republic  after  the  victory 
gained  by  Samuel  Houston,  on  the  banks  of  the  San  Jacinto, 
over  the  troops  of  Santa  Anna! — a  country,  in  fine,  which 
voluntarily  annexed  itself  to  the  United  States  of  Amer- 
ica!" 

"Yes;  because  it  was  afraid  of  the  Mexicans!"  replied 
Florida. 

"Afraid!"  From  this  moment  the  state  of  things  be- 
came intolerable.  A  sanguinary  encounter  seemed  daily 
imminent  between  the  two  parties  in  the  streets  of  Balti- 
more.   It  became  necessary  to  keep  an  eye  upon  the  deputies. 


178       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

President  Barbicane  knew  not  which  way  to  look.  Notes, 
documents,  letters  full  of  menaces  showered  down  upon  his 
house.  Which  side  ought  he  to  take?  As  regards  the 
appropriation  of  the  soil,  the  facility  of  communication,  the 
rapidity  of  transport,  the  claims  of  both  states  were  evenly 
balanced.  As  for  political  pre-possessions,  they  had  nothing 
to  do  with  the  question. 

This  dead-lock  had  existed  for  some  little  time,  when 
Barbicane  resolved  to  get  rid  of  it  at  once.  He  called  a 
meeting  of  his  colleagues,  and  laid  before  them  a  proposi- 
tion which,  it  will  be  seen,  was  profoundly  sagacious. 

"  On  carefully  considering,"  he  said,  "  what  is  going  on 
now  between  Florida  and  Texas,  it  is  clear  that  the  same 
difficulties  will  recur  with  all  the  towns  of  the  favored  state. 
The  rivalry  will  descend  from  state  to  city,  and  so  on 
downwards.  Now  Texas  possesses  eleven  towns  within  the 
prescribed  conditions,  which  will  further  dispute  the  honor 
and  create  us  new  enemies,  while  Florida  has  only  one. 
I  go  in,  therefore,  for  Florida  and  Tampa  Town." 

This  decision,  on  being  made  known,  utterly  crushed  the 
Texan  deputies.  Seized  with  an  indescribable  fury,  they 
addressed  threatening  letters  to  the  different  members  of 
the  Gun  Club  by  name.  The  magistrates  had  but  one  course 
to  take,  and  they  took  it.  They  chartered  a  special  train, 
forced  the  Texans  into  it  whether  they  would  or  no;  and 
they  quitted  the  city  with  a  speed  of  thirty  miles  an  hour. 

Quickly,  however,  as  they  were  dispatched,  they  found 
time  to  hurl  one  last  and  bitter  sarcasm  at  their  adversaries. 

Alluding  to  the  extent  of  Florida,  a  mere  peninsula  con- 
fined between  two  seas,  they  pretended  that  it  could  never 
sustain  the  shock  of  the  discharge,  and  that  it  would  "  bust 
up  "  at  the  very  first  shot. 

"  Very  well,  let  it  bust  up !  "  replied  the  Floridans,  with 
a  brevity  worthy  of  the  days  of  ancient  Sparta. 


CHAPTER  XII 

URBI  ET  ORBI 

The  astronomical,  mechanical,  and  topographical  diffi- 
culties resolved,  finally  came  the  question  of  finance.  The 
sum  required  was  far  too  great  for  any  individual,  or  even 
any  single  state,  to  provide  the  requisite  millions. 


URBI  ET  ORBI  179 

President  Barbicane  undertook,  despite  the  matter  being 
a  purely  American  affair,  to  render  it  one  of  universal  inter- 
est, and  to  request  the  financial  co-operation  of  all  peoples. 
It  was,  he  maintained,  the  right  and  duty  of  the  whole  earth 
to  interfere  in  the  affairs  of  its  satellite.  The  subscription 
opened  at  Baltimore  extended  properly  to  the  whole  world — 
Urbi  et  orbi. 

This  subscription  was  successful  beyond  all  expectation; 
notwithstanding  that  it  was  a  question  not  of  lending  but  of 
giving  the  money.  It  was  a  purely  disinterested  operation 
in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  term,  and  offered  not  the  slight- 
est chance  of  profit. 

The  effect,  however,  of  Barbicane's  communication  was 
not  confided  to  the  frontiers  of  the  United  States ;  it  crossed 
the  Atlantic  and  Pacific,  invading  simultaneously  Asia, 
Europe,  Africa  and  Oceanica.  The  observatories  of  the 
Union  placed  themselves  in  immediate  communication  with 
those  of  foreign  countries.  Some,  such  as  those  of  Paris, 
Petersburg,  Berlin,  Stockholm,  Hamburg,  Malta,  Lisbon, 
Benares,  Madras,  and  others,  transmitted  their  good  wishes ; 
the  rest  maintained  a  prudent  silence,  quietly  awaiting  the 
result.  As  for  the  observatory  at  Greenwich,  seconded  as 
it  was  by  the  twenty-two  astronomical  establishments  of  ' 
Great  Britain,  it  spoke  plainly  enough.  It  boldly  denied  the 
possibility  of  success,  and  pronounced  in  favor  of  the  theo- 
ries of  Captain  Nicholl.  But  this  was  nothing  more  than 
mere  English  jealousy. 

On  the  8th  of  October  President  Barbicane  published,  a 
manifesto  full  of  enthusiasm,  in  which  he  made  an  appeal 
to  "all  persons  of  good  will  upon  the  face  of  the  earth." 
This  document,  translated  into  all  languages,  met  with  im- 
mense success. 

Subscription  lists  were  opened  in  all  the  principal  cities 
of  the  Union,  with  a  central  office  at  the  Baltimore  Bank, 

Three  days  after  the  manifesto  of  President  Barbicane 
4,000,000  of  dollars  were  paid  into  the  different  towns  of 
the  Union.  With  such  a  balance  the  Gun  Club  might  begin 
operations  at  once.  But  some  days  later  advices  were  re- 
ceived to  the  effect  that  the  foreign  subscriptions  were  being 
eagerly  taken  up.  Certain  countries  distinguished  them- 
selves by  their  liberality;  others  untied  their  purse-strings 
with  less  facility — matter  of  temperament.     Figures  are, 


180       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

however,  more  eloquent  than  words,  and  here  is  the  official 
statement  of  the  sums  which  were  paid  in  to  the  credit 
of  the  Gun  Club  at  the  close  of  the  subscription. 

Russia  paid  in  as  her  contingent  the  enormous  sum  of 
368,733  roubles.  No  one  need  be  surprised  at  this,  who 
bears  in  mind  the  scientific  taste  of  the  Russians,  and  the 
impetus  which  they  have  given  to  astronomical  studies — 
thanks  to  their  numerous  observatories. 

France  began  by  deriding  the  pretensions  of  the  Ameri- 
cans. The  moon  served  as  a  pretext  for  a  thousand  stale 
puns  and  a  score  of  ballads,  in  which  bad  taste  contested 
the  palm  with  ignorance.  But  as  formerly  the  French  paid 
before  singing,  so  now  they  paid  after  having  had  their 
laugh,  and  they  subscribed  for  a  sum  of  1,253,930  francs. 
At  that  price  they  had  a  right  to  enjoy  themselves  a  little. 

Austria  showed  herself  generous  in  the  midst  of  her 
financial  crisis.  Her  public  contributions  amounted  to  the 
sum  of  216,000  florins — a  perfect  godsend. 

Fifty-two  thousand  rix-dollars  were  the  remittance  of 
Sweden  and  Norway;  the  amount  is  large  for  the  country, 
but  it  would  undoubtedly  have  been  considerably  increased 
had  the  subscription  been  opened  in  Christiania  simultane- 
ously with  that  at  Stockholm.  For  some  reason  or  other 
the  Norwegians  do  not  like  to  send  their  money  to  Sweden. 

Prussia,  by  a  remittance  of  250,000  thalers,  testified  her 
high  approval  of  the  enterprise. 

Turkey  behaved  generously;  but  she  had  a  personal  in- 
terest in  the  matter.  The  moon,  in  fact,  regulates  the  cycle 
of  her  years  and  her  fast  of  Ramadan.  She  could  not  do 
less  than  give  1,372,640  piastres;  and  she  gave  them  with 
an  eagerness  which  denoted,  however,  some  pressure  on  the 
part  of  the  Government. 

Belgium  distinguished  herself  among  the  second-rate 
states  by  a  grant  of  513,000  francs — about  two  centimes  per 
head  of  her  population. 

Holland  and  her  colonies  interested  themselves  to  the 
extent  of  110,000  florins,  only  demanding  an  allowance  of 
five  per  cent,  discount  for  paying  ready  money. 

Denmark,  a  little  contracted  in  territory,  gave  neverthe- 
less 9,000  ducats,  proving  her  love  for  scientific  experi- 
ments. 

The  Germanic  Confederation  pledged  itself  to  34,285 


URBI  ET  ORBI  181' 

florins.  It  was  impossible  to  ask  for  more;  besides,  they 
would  not  have  given  it. 

Though  very  much  crippled,  Italy  found  200,000  lire  in 
the  pockets  of  her  people.  If  she  had  had  Venetia  she  would 
have  done  better ;  but  she  had  not. 

The  States  of  the  Church  thought  that  they  could  not 
send  less  than  7,040  Roman  crowns;  and  Portugal  carried 
her  devotion  to  science  as  far  as  30,000  cruzados.  It  was 
the  widow's  mite — eighty-six  piastres;  but  self-constituted 
empires  are  always  rather  short  of  money. 

Two  hundred  and  fifty-seven  francs,  this  was  the  modest 
contribution  of  Switzerland  to  the  American  work.  One 
must  freely  admit  that  she  did  not  see  the  practical  side  of 
the  matter.  It  did  not  seem  to  her  that  the  mere  dispatch 
of  a  shot  to  the  moon  could  possibly  establish  any  relation 
of  affairs  with  her;  and  it  did  not  seem  prudent  to  her  to 
embark  her  capital  in  so  hazardous  an  enterprise.  After  all, 
perhaps  she  was  right. 

As  to  Spain,  she  could  not  scrape  together  more  than 
no  reals.  She  gave  as  an  excuse  that  she  had  her  railways 
to  finish.  The  truth  is  that  science  is  not  favorably  re- 
garded in  that  country,  it  is  still  in  a  backward  state;  and, 
moreover,  certain  Spaniards,  not  by  any  means  the  least 
educated,  did  not  form  a  correct  estimate  of  the  bulk  of 
the  projectile  compared  with  that  of  the  moon.  They  feared 
that  it  would  disturb  the  established  order  of  things.  In 
that  case  it  were  better  to  keep  aloof;  which  they  did  to 
the  tune  of  some  reals. 

There  remained  but  England;  and  we  know  the  con- 
temptuous antipathy  with  which  she  received  Barbicane's 
proposition.  The  English  have  but  one  soul  for  the  whole 
twenty-six  millions  of  inhabitants  which  Great  Britain  con- 
tains. They  hinted  that  the  enterprise  of  the  Gun  Club  was 
contrary  to  the  "  principle  of  non-intervention."  And  they 
did  not  subscribe  a  single  farthing. 

At  this  intimation  the  Gun  Club  merely  shrugged  its 
shoulders  and  returned  to  its  great  work.  When  South 
America,  that  is  to  say,  Peru,  Chili,  Brazil,  the  provinces  of 
La  Plata  and  Columbia,  had  poured  forth  their  quota  into 
their  hands,  the  sum  of  $300,000  dollars,  it  found  itself  in 
possession  of  a  considerable  capital,  of  which  the  following 
is  a  statement : 


1 82       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

United  States  subs $4,000,000 

Foreign  subs 1,446,675 

Total    $5,446,675 

Such  was  the  sum  which  the  public  poured  into  the  treas- 
ury of  the  Gun  Club. 

Let  no  one  be  surprised  at  the  vastness  of  the  amount. 
The  work  of  casting,  boring,  masonry,  the  transport  of 
workmen,  their  establishment  in  an  almost  uninhabited 
country,  the  construction  of  furnaces  and  workshops,  the 
plant,  the  powder,  the  projectile,  and  incidental  expenses, 
would,  according  to  the  estimates,  absorb  nearly  the  whole. 
Certain  cannon  shots  in  the  federal  war  cost  1,000  dollars 
apiece.  This  one  of  President  Barbicane's,  unique  in  the 
annals  of  gunnery,  might  well  cost  five  thousand  times 
more. 

On  the  20th  of  October  a  contract  was  entered  into  with 
the  manufactory  at  Coldspring,  near  New  York,  which 
during  the  war  had  furnished  the  largest  Parrott  cast-iron 
guns.  It  was  stipulated  between  the  contracting  parties  that 
the  manufactory  of  Coldspring  should  engage  to  trans- 
port to  Tampa  Town,  in  southern  Florida,  the  necessary 
materials  for  casting  the  Columbiad.  The  work  was  bound 
to  be  completed  at  latest  by  the  15th  of  October  following, 
and  the  cannon  delivered  in  good  condition  under  penalty 
of  a  forfeit  of  100  dollars  a  day  to  the  moment  when  the 
moon  should  again  present  herself  under  the  same  condi- 
tions— that  is  to  say,  in  eighteen  years  and  eleven  days. 

The  engagement  of  the  workmen,  their  pay,  and  all  the 
necessary  details  of  the  work,  devolved  upon  the  Coldspring 
Company. 

This  contract,  executed  in  duplicate,  was  signed  by  Bar- 
bicane,  President  of  the  Gun  Club,  of  the  one  part,  and  T. 
Murphison,  director  of  the  Coldspring  manufactory,  of 
the  other,  who  thus  executed  the  deed  on  behalf  of  their 
respective  principals. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

STONES   HILL 

When  the  decision  was  arrived  at  by  the  Gun  Club,  to 
the  disparagement  of  Texas,  everyone  in  America,  where 
reading  is  a  universal  acquirement,  set  to  work  to  study  the 
geography  of  Florida.  Never  before  had  there  been  such  a 
sale  for  works  like  "  Bertram's  Travels  in  Florida,"  "Ro- 
man's Natural  History  of  East  and  West  Florida,"  "  Wil- 
liams' Territory  of  Florida,"  and  "  Cleland  on  the  Cultiva- 
tion of  the  Sugar  Cane  in  Florida."  It  became  necessary 
to  issue  fresh  editions  of  these  works. 

Barbicane  had  something  better  to  do  than  to  read.  He 
desired  to  see  things  with  his  own  eyes,  and  to  mark  the 
exact  position  of  the  proposed  gun.  So,  without  a  moment's 
loss  of  time,  he  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  Cambridge 
Observatory  the  funds  necessary  for  the  construction  of  a 
telescope,  and  entered  into  negotiations  with  the  house  of 
Breadwill  &  Co.,  of  Albany,  for  the  construction  of  an 
aluminium  projectile  of  the  required  size.  He  then  quitted 
Baltimore,  accompanied  by  J.  T.  Maston,  Major  Elphin- 
stone,  and  the  manager  of  the  Coldspring  Factory. 

On  the  following  day,  the  four  fellow-travelers  arrived 
at  New  Orleans.  There  they  immediately  embarked  on 
board  the  Tampico,  a  dispatch-boat  belonging  to  the 
Federal  navy,  which  the  Government  had  placed  at  their 
disposal ;  and,  getting  up  steam,  the  banks  of  the  Louisiana 
speedily  disappeared  from  sight. 

The  passage  was  not  long.  Two  days  after  starting, 
the  Tampico,  having  made  four  hundred  and  eighty  miles, 
came  in  sight  of  the  coast  of  Florida.  On  a  nearer  ap- 
proach Barbicane  found  himself  in  view  of  a  low,  flat 
country  of  somewhat  barren  aspect.  After  coasting  along 
a  series  of  creeks  abounding  in  lobsters  and  oysters,  the 
Tampico  entered  the  bay  of  Espiritu  Santo,  where  she 
finally  anchored  in  a  small  natural  harbor,  formed  by  the 
embouchure  of  the  River  Hillisborough,  at  seven  p.  m.,  on 
the  22nd  of  October. 

Our  four  passengers  disembarked  at  once.  "  Gentle- 
men," said  President  Barbicane,  "  we  have  no  time  to  lose ; 
we  must  obtain  horses,  and  proceed  to  reconnoiter  the  coun- 
try." 

183 


184       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

Barbicane  had  scarcely  set  his  foot  on  shore  when  three 
thousand  of  the  inhabitants  of  Tampa  Town  came  forth  to 
meet  him,  an  honor  due  to  the  president  who  had  signal- 
ized their  country  by  his  choice. 

Declining,  however,  every  kind  of  ovation,  Barbicane 
ensconced  himself  in  a  room  of  the  Franklin  Hotel. 

On  the  morrow  some  of  those  small  horses  of  Spanish 
breed,  full  of  vigor  and  of  fire,  stood  snorting  under  his 
windows;  but  instead  of  four  steeds,  here  were  fifty,  to- 
gether with  their  riders.  Barbicane  descended  with  his 
three  fellow-travelers;  and  much  astonished  were  they  all 
to  find  themselves  in  the  midst  of  such  a  cavalcade.  He  re- 
marked that  every  horseman  carried  a  carbine  slung  across 
his  shoulders  and  pistols  in  his  holsters. 

On  expressing  his  surprise  at  these  preparations,  he  was 
speedily  enlightened  by  a  young  Floridan,  who  quietly  said : 

"  Sir,  there  are  Seminoles  there." 

"  What  do  you  mean  by  Seminoles  ?  " 

"  Savages  who  scour  the  prairies.  We  thought  it  best, 
therefore,  to  escort  you  on  your  road." 

"  Pooh ! "  cried  J.  T.  Maston,  mounting  his  steed. 

"All  right,"  said  the  Floridan;  "but  it  is  true  enough, 
nevertheless." 

"  Gentlemen,"  answered  Barbicane,  "  I  thank  you  for 
your  kind  attention ;  but  it  is  time  to  be  off." 

It  was  five  A.  m.  when  Barbicane  and  his  party,  quitting 
Tampa  Town,  made  their  way  along  the  coast  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Alifia  Creek.  This  little  river  falls  into  Hillisbor- 
ough  Bay  twelve  miles  above  Tampa  Town.  Barbicane 
and  his  escort  coasted  along  its  right  bank  to  the  eastward. 
Soon  the  waves  of  the  bay  disappeared  behind  a  bend  of 
rising  ground,  and  the  Floridan  "  champagne  "  alone  of- 
fered itself  to  view. 

Florida,  discovered  on  Palm  Sunday,  in  15 12,  by  Juan 
Ponce  de  Leon,  was  originally  named  Pascha  Florida.  It 
little  deserved  that  designation  with  its  dry  and  parched 
coasts.  But  after  some  few  miles  of  tract  the  nature  of  the 
soil  gradually  changes  and  the  country  shows  itself  worthy 
of  the  name.  Cultivated  plains  soon  appear,  where  are 
united  all  the  productions  of  the  northern  and  tropical 
floras,  terminating  in  prairies  abounding  with  pine-apples 
and  yams,  tobacco,  rice,  cotton-plants  and  sugar-cane,  which 


STONES  HILL  185 

extend  beyond  reach  of  sight,  flinging  their  riches  broad- 
cast with  careless  prodigality. 

Barbicane  appeared  highly  pleased  on  observing  the  pro- 
gressive elevation  of  the  land;  and  in  answer  to  a  question 
of  J.  T.  Maston,  replied: 

"  My  worthy  friend,  we  cannot  do  better  than  sink  our 
Columbiad  in  these  high  grounds." 

"To  get  nearer  to  the  moon,  perhaps?"  said  the  secre- 
tary of  the  Gun  Club. 

"Not  exactly,"  replied  Barbicane,  smiling;  "do  you  not 
see  that  amongst  these  elevated  plateaus  we  shall  have  a 
much  easier  work  of  it?  No  struggles  with  the  water- 
springs,  which  will  save  us  long  and  expensive  tubings; 
and  we  shall  be  working  in  daylight  instead  of  down  a  deep 
and  narrow  well.  Our  business,  then,  is  to  open  our 
trenches  upon  ground  some  hundreds  of  yards  above  the 
level  of  the  sea." 

"  You  are  right,  sir,"  struck  in  Murchison,  the  engineer ; 
"  and,  if  I  mistake  not,  we  shall  ere  long  find  a  suitable 
spot  for  our  purpose." 

"  I  wish  we  were  at  the  first  stroke  of  the  pick-ax,"  said 
the  president. 

"  And  I  wish  we  were  at  the  last,"  cried  J.  T.  Maston. 

About  ten  a.  m.  the  little  band  had  crossed  a  dozen  miles. 
To  fertile  plains  succeeded  a  region  of  forests.  There  per- 
fumes of  the  most  varied  kinds  mingled  together  in  tropi- 
cal profusion.  These  almost  impenetrable  forests  were 
composed  of  pomegranates,  orange-trees,  citrons,  figs, 
olives,  apricots,  bananas,  huge  vines,  whose  blossoms  and 
fruits  rivaled  each  other  in  color  and  perfume.  Beneath 
the  odorous  shade  of  these  magnificent  trees  fluttered  and 
warbled  a  little  world  of  brilliantly-plumaged  birds. 

J.  T.  Maston  and  the  major  could  not  repress  their  ad- 
miration on  finding  themselves  in  presence  of  the  glorious 
beauties  of  this  wealth  of  nature.  President  Barbicane, 
however,  less  sensitive  to  these  wonders,  was  in  haste  to 
press  forward ;  the  very  luxuriance  of  the  country  was  dis- 
pleasing to  him.  They  hastened  onwards,  therefore,  and 
were  compelled  to  ford  several  rivers,  not  without  danger, 
for  they  were  infested  with  huge  alligators  from  fifteen 
to  eighteen  feet  long.  Maston  courageously  menaced 
them  with  his  steel  hook,  but  he  only  succeeded  in  fright- 


1 86       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

ening  some  pelicans  and  teal,  while  tall  flamingos  stared 
stupidly  at  the  party. 

At  length  these  denizens  of  the  swamps  disappeared  in 
their  turn;  smaller  trees  became  thinly  scattered  among 
less  dense  thickets — a  few  isolated  groups  detached  in  the 
midst  of  endless  plains  over  which  ranged  herds  of  startled 
deer. 

"  At  last,"  cried  Barbicane,  rising  in  his  stirrups,  "  here 
we  are  at  the  region  of  pines !  " 

"  Yes !  and  of  savages  too,"  replied  the  major. 

In  fact,  some  Seminoles  had  just  come  in  sight  upon  the 
horizon;  they  rode  violently  backwards  and  forwards  on 
their  fleet  horses,  brandishing  their  spears  or  discharging 
their  guns  with  a  dull  report.  These  hostile  demonstra- 
tions, however,  had  no  effect  upon  Barbicane  and  his  com- 
panions. 

They  were  then  occupying  the  center  of  a  rocky  plain, 
which  the  sun  scorched  with  its  parching  rays.  This  was 
formed  by  a  considerable  elevation  of  the  soil  which 
seemed  to  offer  to  the  members  of  the  Gun  Club  all  the  con- 
ditions requisite  for  the  construction  of  their  Columbiad. 

"  Halt !  "  said  Barbicane,  reining  up.  "  Has  this  place 
any  local  appellation  ?  " 

"  It  is  called  Stones  Hill,"  replied  one  of  the  Floridans. 

Barbicane,  without  saying  a  word,  dismounted,  seized  his 
instruments,  and  began  to  note  his  position  with  extreme 
exactness.  The  little  band  drawn  up  in  rear,  watched  his 
proceedings  in  profound  silence. 

At  this  moment  the  sun  passed  the  meridian.  Barbi- 
cane, after  a  few  moments,  rapidly  wrote  down  the  result 
of  his  observations,  and  said : 

"This  spot  is  situated  800  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
sea,  ill  27°  /  N.  lat.  and  50  7'  W.  long,  of  the  meridian  of 
Washington.  It  appears  to  me  by  its  rocky  and  barren 
character  to  offer  all  the  conditions  requisite  for  our  experi- 
ment. On  that  plain  will  be  raised  our  magazines,  work- 
shops, furnaces,  and  workmen's  huts;  and  here,  from  this 
very  spot,"  said  he,  stamping  his  foot  on  the  summit  of 
Stones  Hill,  "  hence  shall  our  projectile  take  its  flight  into 
the  regions  of  the  Solar  World." 


CHAPTER   XIV 

PICKAX  AND  TROWEL 

The  same  evening  Barbicane  and  his  companions  re- 
turned to  Tampa  Town;  and  Murchison,  the  engineer,  re- 
embarked  on  board  the  Tampico  for  New  Orleans.  His 
object  was  to  enlist  an  army  of  workmen,  and  to  collect 
together  the  greater  part  of  the  materials.  The  members 
of  the  Gun  Club  remained  at  Tampa  Town,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  setting  on  foot  the  preliminary  works  by  the  aid 
of  the  people  of  the  country. 

Eight  days  after  its  departure,  the  Tampico  returned  into 
the  bay  of  Espiritu  Santo,  with  a  whole  flotilla  of  steam- 
boats. Murchison  had  succeeded  in  assembling  together 
fifteen  hundred  artisans.  Attracted  by  the  high  pay  and 
considerable  bounties  offered  by  the  Gun  Club,  he  had  en- 
listed a  choice  legion  of  stokers,  iron-founders,  lime-burn- 
ers, miners,  brickmakers,  and  artisans  of  every  trade,  with- 
out distinction  of  color.  As  many  of  these  people  brought 
their  families  with  them,  their  departure  resembled  a  per- 
fect emigration. 

On  the  31st  of  October,  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the 
troop  disembarked  on  the  quays  of  Tampa  Town ;  and  one 
may  imagine  the  activity  which  pervaded  that  little  town, 
whose  population  was  thus  doubled  in  a  single  day. 

During  the  first  few  days  they  were  busy  discharging 
the  cargo  brought  by  the  flotilla,  the  machines,  and  the  ra- 
tions, as  well  as  a  large  number  of  huts  constructed  of 
iron  plates,  separately  pieced  and  numbered.  At  the  same 
period,  Barbicane  laid  the  first  sleepers  of  a  railway  fifteen 
miles  in  length,  intended  to  unite  Stones  Hill  with  Tampa 
Town.  On  the  first  of  November  Barbicane  quitted 
Tampa  Town  with  a  detachment  of  workmen;  and  on  the 
following  day  the  whole  town  of  huts  was  erected  round 
Stones  Hill.  This  they  enclosed  with  palisades;  and  in 
respect  of  energy  and  activity,  it  might  have  shortly  been 
mistaken  for  one  of  the  great  cities  of  the  Union.  Every- 
thing was  placed  under  a  complete  system  of  discipline, 
and  the  works  were  commenced  in  most  perfect  order. 

The  nature  of  the  soil  having  been  carefully  examined, 
by  means  of  repeated  borings,  the  work  of  excavation  was 
fixed  for  the  4th  of  November. 

On  that  day  Barbicane  called  together  his  foremen  and 

187 


1 88       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

addressed  them  as  follows:  "You  are  well  aware,  my 
friends,  of  the  object  with  which  I  have  assembled  you 
together  in  this  wild  part  of  Florida.  Our  business  is  to 
construct  a  cannon  measuring  nine  feet  in  its  interior 
diameter,  six  feet  thick,  and  with  a  stone  revetment  of  nine- 
teen and  a  half  feet  in  thickness.  We  have,  therefore,  a 
well  of  sixty  feet  in  diameter  to  dig  down  to  a  depth  of 
nine  hundred  feet.  This  great  work  must  be  completed 
within  eight  months,  so  that  you  have  2,543,400  cubic  feet 
of  earth  to  excavate  in  255  days;  that  is  to  say,  in  round 
numbers,  2,000  cubic  feet  per  day.  That  which  would 
present  no  difficulty  to  a  thousand  navvies  working  in  open 
country  will  be  of  course  more  troublesome  in  a  compara- 
tively confined  space.  However,  the  thing  must  be  done, 
and  I  reckon  for  its  accomplishment  upon  your  courage 
as  much  as  upon  your  skill." 

At  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  the  first  stroke  of  the 
pickax  was  struck  upon  the  soil  of  Florida;  and  from  that 
moment  that  prince  of  tools  was  never  inactive  for  one 
moment  in  the  hands  of  the  excavators.  The  gangs  re- 
lieved each  other  every  three  hours. 

On  the  fourth  of  November  fifty  workmen  commenced 
digging,  in  the  very  center  of  the  enclosed  space  on  the 
summit  of  Stones  Hill,  a  circular  hole  sixty  feet  in  diam- 
eter. The  pickax  first  struck  upon  a  kind  of  black  earth, 
six  inches  in  thickness,  which  was  speedily  disposed  of. 
To  this  earth  succeeded  two  feet  of  fine  sand,  which  was 
carefully  laid  aside  as  being  valuable  for  serving  for  the 
casting  of  the  inner  mould.  After  the  sand  appeared  some 
compact  white  clay,  resembling  the  chalk  of  Great  Britain, 
which  extended  down  to  a  depth  of  four  feet.  Then  the 
iron  of  the  picks  struck  upon  the  hard  bed  of  the  soil;  a 
kind  of  rock  formed  of  petrified  shells,  very  dry,  very  solid, 
and  which  the  picks  could  with  difficulty  penetrate.  At 
this  point  the  excavation  exhibited  a  depth  of  six  feet  and  a 
half,  and  the  work  of  the  masonry  was  begun. 

At  the  bottom  of  this  excavation  they  constructed  a 
wheel  of  oak,  a  kind  of  circle  strongly  bolted  together,  and 
of  immense  strength.  The  center  of  this  wooden  disc  was 
hollowed  out  to  a  diameter  equal  to  the  exterior  diameter 
of  the  Columbiad.  Upon  this  wheel  rested  the  first  layers 
of  the  masonry,  the  stones  of  which  were  bound  together 


PICKAX  AND  TROWEL  189 

by  hydraulic  cement,  with  irresistible  tenacity.  The  work- 
men, after  laying  the  stones  from  the  circumference  to  the 
center,  were  thus  enclosed  within  a  kind  of  well  twenty-one 
feet  in  diameter.  When  this  work  was  accomplished,  the 
miners  resumed  their  picks  and  cut  away  the  rock  from  un- 
derneath the  wheel  itself,  taking  care  to  support  it  as  they 
advanced  upon  blocks  of  great  thickness.  At  every  two 
feet  which  the  hole  gained  in  depth  they  successively  with- 
drew the  blocks.  The  wheel  then  sank  little  by  little,  and 
with  it  the  massive  ring  of  masonry,  on  the  upper  bed  of 
which  the  masons  labored  incessantly,  always  reserving 
some  vent-holes  to  permit  the  escape  of  gas  during  the 
operation  of  casting. 

This  kind  of  work  required  on  the  part  of  the  workmen 
extreme  nicety  and  minute  attention.  More  than  one,  in 
digging  underneath  the  wheel,  was  dangerously  injured 
by  the  splinters  of  stone.  But  their  ardor  never  relaxed, 
night  or  day.  By  day  they  worked  under  the  rays  of  the 
scorching  sun;  by  night,  under  the  gleams  of  the  electric 
light.  The  sounds  of  the  picks  against  the  rock,  the  burst- 
ing of  mines,  the  grinding  of  the  machines,  the  wreaths  of 
smoke  scattered  through  the  air,  traced  around  Stones  Hill 
a  circle  of  terror  which  the  herds  of  buffaloes  and  the  war 
parties  of  the  Seminoles  never  ventured  to  pass.  Never- 
theless, the  works  advanced  regularly,  as  the  steam-cranes 
actively  removed  the  rubbish.  Of  unexpected  obstacles 
there  was  little  account;  and  with  regard  to  foreseen  diffi- 
culties, they  were  speedily  disposed  of. 

At  the  expiration  of  the  first  month  the  well  had  attained 
the  depth  assigned  for  that  lapse  of  time,  viz.  112  feet. 
This  depth  was  doubled  in  December,  and  trebled  in  Jan- 
uary. 

During  the  month  of  February  the  workmen  had  to  con- 
tend with  a  sheet  of  water  which  made  its  way  right  across 
the  outer  soil.  It  became  necessary  to  employ  very  power- 
ful pumps  and  compressed  air-engines  to  drain  it  off,  so  as 
to  close  up  the  orifice  from  whence  it  issued;  just  as  one 
stops  a  leak  on  board  ship.  They  at  last  succeeded  in  get- 
ting the  upper  hand  of  these  untoward  streams;  only,  in 
consequence  of  the  loosening  of  the  soil,  the  wheel  partly 
gave  way,  and  a  slight  partial  settlement  ensued.  This 
accident  cost  the  life  of  several  workmen. 


u)o       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

No  fresh  occurrence  thenceforward  arrested  the  progress 
of  the  operation ;  and  on  the  ioth  of  June,  twenty  days  be- 
fore the  expiration  of  the  period  fixed  by  Barbicane,  the 
well,  lined  throughout  with  its  facing  of  stone,  had  attained 
the  depth  of  poo  feet.  At  the  bottom  the  masonry  rested 
upon  a  massive  block  measuring  thirty  feet  in  thickness, 
whilst  on  the  upper  portion  it  was  level  with  the  surround- 
ing soil. 

President  Barbicane  and  the  members  of  the  Gun  Club 
warmly  congratulated  their  engineer  Murchison;  the  Cy- 
clopean work  had  been  accomplished  with  extraordinary 
rapidity. 

During  these  eight  months  Barbicane  never  quitted 
Stones  Hill  for  a  single  instant.  Keeping  ever  close  by 
the  work  of  excavation,  he  busied  himself  incessantly  with 
the  welfare  and  health  of  his  workpeople,  and  was  singu- 
larly fortunate  in  warding  off  the  epidemics  common  to 
large  communities  of  men,  and  so  disastrous  in  those  re- 
gions of  the  globe  which  are  exposed  to  the  influence  of 
tropical  climates. 

Many  workmen,  it  is  true,  paid  with  their  lives  for  the 
rashness  inherent  in  these  dangerous  labors ;  but  these  mis- 
haps are  impossible  to  be  avoided,  and  they  are  classed 
amongst  details  with  which  the  Americans  trouble  them- 
selves but  little.  They  have  in  fact  more  regard  for  hu- 
man nature  in  general  than  for  the  individual  in  particular. 

Nevertheless,  Barbicane  professed  opposite  principles  to 
these,  and  put  them  in  force  at  every  opportunity.  So, 
thanks  to  his  care,  his  intelligence,  his  useful  intervention 
in  all  difficulties  his  prodigious  and  humane  sagacity,  the 
average  of  accidents  did  not  exceed  that  of  transatlantic 
countries,  noted  for  their  excessive  precautions,  France, 
for  instance,  among  others,  where  they  reckon  about  one 
accident  for  every  two  hundred  thousand  francs  of  work. 


CHAPTER    XV 

THE  FETE  OF  THE  CASTING 

During  the  eight  months  which  were  employed  in  the 
work  of  excavation  the  preparatory  works  of  the  casting 
had  been  carried  on  simultaneously  with  extreme  rapidity. 


THE  FETE  OF  THE  CASTING  191 

A  stranger  arriving  at  Stones  Hill  would  have  been  sur- 
prised at  the  spectacle  offered  to  his  view. 

At  600  yards  from  the  well,  and  circularly  arranged 
around  it  as  a  central  point,  rose  1,200  reverberating  ovens, 
each  six  feet  in  diameter,  and  separated  from  each  other  by 
an  interval  of  three  feet.  The  circumference  occupied  by 
these  1,200  ovens  presented  a  length  of  two  miles.  Being 
all  constructed  on  the  same  plan,  each  with  its  high  quad- 
rangular chimney,  they  produced  a  most  singular  effect. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  on  their  third  meeting  the 
committee  had  decided  to  use  cast-iron  for  the  Columbiad, 
and  in  particular  the  white  description.  This  metal  in  fact 
is  the  most  tenacious,  the  most  ductile,  and  the  most  mallea- 
ble, and  consequently  suitable  for  all  molding  operations; 
and  when  smelted  with  pit  coal,  is  of  superior  quality  for 
all  engineering  works  requiring  great  resisting  power,  such 
as  cannon,  steam-boilers,  hydraulic  presses,  and  the  like. 

Cast-iron,  however,  if  subjected  to  only  one  single  fu- 
sion, is  rarely  sufficiently  homogeneous;  and  it  requires  a 
second  fusion  completely  to  refine  it  by  dispossessing  it  of 
its  last  earthly  deposits.  So  before  being  forwarded  to 
Tampa  Town,  the  iron  ore,  molten  in  the  great  furnaces 
of  Coldspring,  and  brought  into  contact  with  coal  and 
silicium  heated  to  a  high  temperature,  was  carburized  and 
transformed  into  cast-iron.  After  this  first  operation,  the 
metal  was  sent  on  to  Stones  Hill.  They  had,  however,  to 
deal  with  136,000,000  lbs.  of  iron,  a  quantity  far  too  costly 
to  send  by  railway.  The  cost  of  transport  would  have  been 
double  that  of  material.  It  appeared  preferable  to  freight 
vessels  at  New  York,  and  to  load  them  with  the  iron  in 
bars.  This,  however,  required  not  less  than  sixty-eight 
vessels  of  1,000  tons,  a  veritable  fleet,  which,  quitting  New 
York  on  the  3rd  of  May,  on  the  10th  of  the  same  month 
ascended  the  Bay  of  Espiritu  Santo  and  discharged  their 
cargoes,  without  dues,  in  the  port  at  Tampa  Town. 
Thence  the  iron  was  transported  by  rail  to  Stones  Hill, 
and  about  the  middle  of  January  this  enormous  mass  of 
metal  was  delivered  at  its  destination. 

It  will  be  easily  understood  that  1,200  furnaces  were 
not  too  many  to  melt  simultaneously  these  60,000  tons  of 
iron.  Each  of  these  furnaces  contained  nearly  140,000 
lbs.  weight  of  metal.     They  were  all  built  after  the  model 


192       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

of  those  which  served  for  the  casting  of  the  Rodman  gun, 
they  were  trapezoidal  in  shape,  with  a  high  elliptical  arch. 
These  furnaces,  constructed  of  fire-proof  brick,  were  es- 
pecially adapted  for  burning  pit  coal,  with  a  flat  bottom 
upon  which  the  iron  bars  were  laid.  This  bottom,  inclined 
at  an  angle  of  25  °,  allowed  the  metal  to  flow  into  the  re- 
ceiving troughs;  and  the  1,200  converging  trenches  car- 
ried the  molten  metal  down  to  the  central  well. 

The  day  following  that  on  which  the  works  of  the  ma- 
sonry and  boring  had  been  completed,  Barbicane  set  to 
work  upon  the  central  mold.  His  object  now  was  to  raise 
within  the  center  of  the  well,  and  with  a  coincident  axis, 
a  cylinder  900  feet  high,  and  nine  feet  in  diameter,  which 
should  exactly  fill  up  the  space  reserved  for  the  bore  of 
the  Columbiad.  This  cylinder  was  composed  of  a  mix- 
ture of  clay  and  sand,  with  the  addition  of  a  little  hay  and 
straw.  The  space  left  between  the  mold  and  the  masonry 
was  intended  to  be  filled  up  by  the  molten  metal,  which 
would  thus  form  the  walls  six  feet  in  thickness.  This 
cylinder,  in  order  to  maintain  its  equilibrium,  had  to  be 
bound  by  iron  bands,  and  firmly  fixed  at  certain  intervals 
by  cross-clamps  fastened  into  the  stone  lining;  after  the 
casting  these  would  be  buried  in  the  block  of  metal,  leaving 
no  external  projection. 

This  operation  was  completed  on  the  8th  of  July,  and 
the  run  of  the  metal  was  fixed  for  the  following  day. 

"This  fete  of  the  casting  will  be  a  grand  ceremony," 
said  J.  T.  Maston  to  his  friend  Barbicane. 

"Undoubtedly,"  said  Barbicane;  "but  it  will  not  be  a 
public  fete." 

"  What !  will  you  not  open  the  gates  of  the  enclosure  to 
all  comers?" 

"I  must  be  very  careful,  Maston.  The  casting  of  the 
Columbiad  is  an  extremely  delicate,  not  to  say  a  dangerous, 
operation,  and  I  should  prefer  its  being  done  privately.  At 
the  discharge  of  the  projectile,  a  fete  if  you  like — till 
then,  no ! " 

The  president  was  right.  The  operation  involved  un- 
foreseen dangers,  which  a  great  influx  of  spectators  would 
have  hindered  him  from  averting.  It  was  necessary  to 
preserve  complete  freedom  of  movement.  No  one,- was 
admitted  within  the  enclosure  except  a  delegation  of  mem- 

V.  Ill  Verne 


THE  FETE  OF  THE  CASTING  193 

bers  of  the  Gun  Club,  who  had  made  the  voyage  to  Tampa 
Town.  Among  these  was  the  brisk  Bilsby,  Tom  Hunter, 
Colonel  Blomsberry,  Major  Elphinstone,  General  Morgan, 
and  the  rest  of  the  lot  to  whom  the  casting  of  the  Colum- 
biad  was  a  matter  of  personal  interest.  J.  T.  Maston  be- 
came their  cicerone.  He  omitted  no  point  of  detail;  he 
conducted  them  throughout  the  magazines,  workshops, 
through  the  midst  of  the  engines,  and  compelled  them  to 
visit  the  whole  1,200  furnaces  one  after  the  other.  At  the 
end  of  the  twelve-hundredth  visit  they  were  pretty  well 
knocked  up. 

The  casting  was  to  take  place  at  12  o'clock  precisely. 
The  previous  evening  each  furnace  had  been  charged  with 
114,000  lbs.  weight  of  metal  in  bars  disposed  cross-ways  to 
each  other,  so  as  to  allow  the  hot  air  to  circulate  freely  be- 
tween them.  At  daybreak  the  1,200  chimneys  vomited 
their  torrents  of  flame  into  the  air,  and  the  ground  was 
agitated  with  dull  tremblings.  As  many  pounds  of  metal 
as  there  were  to  cast,  so  many  pounds  of  coal  were  there  to 
burn.  Thus  there  were  68,000  tons  of  coal  which  projected 
in  the  face  of  the  sun  a  thick  curtain  of  smoke.  The  heat 
soon  became  insupportable  within  the  circle  of  furnaces, 
the  rumbling  of  which  resembled  the  rolling  of  thunder. 
The  powerful  ventilators  added  their  continuous  blasts  and 
saturated  with  oxygen  the  glowing  plates.  The  operation, 
to  be  successful,  required  to  be  conducted  with  great  rapid- 
ity. On  a  signal  given  by  a  cannon-shot  each  furnace  was 
to  give  vent  to  the  molten  iron  and  completely  to  empty 
itself.  These  arrangements  made,  foremen  and  workmen 
waited  the  preconcerted  moment  with  an  impatience  min- 
gled with  a  certain  amount  of  emotion.  Not  a  soul  re- 
mained within  the  enclosure.  Each  superintendent  took 
his  post  by  the  aperture  of  the  run. 

Barbicane  and  his  colleagues,  perched  on  a  neighboring 
eminence,  assisted  at  the  operation.  In  front  of  them  was 
a  piece  of  artillery  ready  to  give  fire  on  the  signal  from  the 
engineer.  Some  minutes  before  midday  the  first  driblets 
of  metal  began  to  flow;  the  reservoirs  filled  little  by  little; 
and,  by  the  time  that  the  whole  melting  was  completely  ac- 
complished, it  was  kept  in  abeyance  for  a  few  minutes  in 
order  to  facilitate  the  separation  of  foreign  substances. 

Twelve  o'clock  struck!    A  gun-shot  suddenly  pealed 


194.      FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

forth  and  shot  its  flame  into  the  air.  Twelve  hundred 
melting-troughs  were  simultaneously  opened  and  twelve 
hundred  fiery  serpents  crept  towards  the  central  well,  un- 
rolling their  incandescent  curves.  There,  down  they 
plunged  with  a  terrific  noise  into  a  depth  of  900  feet.  It 
was  an  exciting  and  a  magnificent  spectacle.  The  ground 
trembled,  while  these  molten  waves,  launching  into  the  sky 
their  wreaths  of  smoke,  evaporated  the  moisture  of  the 
mold  and  hurled  it  upwards  through  the  vent-holes  of  the 
stone  lining  in  the  form  of  dense  vapor-clouds.  These  arti- 
ficial clouds  unrolled  their  thick  spirals  to  a  height  of  1,000 
yards  into  the  air.  A  savage,  wandering  somewhere  be- 
yond the  limits  of  the  horizon,  might  have  believed  that 
some  new  crater  was  forming  in  the  bosom  of  Florida,  al- 
though there  was  neither  any  eruption,  nor  typhoon,  nor 
storm,  nor  struggle  of  the  elements,  nor  any  of  those  terri- 
ble phenomena  which  nature  is  capable  of  producing.  No, 
it  was  man  alone  who  had  produced  these  reddish  vapors, 
these  gigantic  flames  worthy  of  a  volcano  itself,  these  tre- 
mendous vibrations  resembling  the  shock  of  an  earthquake, 
these  reverberations  rivaling  those  of  hurricanes  and  storms. 
And  it  was  his  hand  which  precipitated  into  an  abyss, 
dug  by  himself,  a  whole  Niagara  of  molten  metal! 


CHAPTER  XVI 

THE    COLUMBIAD 

Had  the  casting  succeeded  ?  They  were  reduced  to  mere 
conjecture.  There  was  indeed  every  reason  to  expect  suc- 
cess, since  the  mold  had  absorbed  the  entire  mass  of  the 
molten  metal;  still  some  considerable  time  must  elapse 
before  they  could  arrive  at  any  certainty  upon  the  matter. 

The  patience  of  the  members  of  the  Gun  Club  was  sorely 
tried  during  this  period  of  time.  But  they  could  do  noth- 
ing. J.  T.  Maston  escaped  roasting  by  a  miracle.  Fifteen 
days  after  the  casting  an  immense  column  of  smoke  was 
still  rising  in  the  open  sky,  and  the  ground  burned  the  soles 
of  the  feet  within  a  radius  of  200  feet  round  the  summit  of. 
Stones  Hill.  It  was  impossible  to  approach  nearer.  All 
they  could  do  was  to  wait  with  what  patience  they  might. 

"  Here  we  are  at  the  10th  of  August,"  exclaimed  J.  T. 


THE  COLUMBIAD  193 

Maston  one  morning,  "  only  four  months  to  the  1st  of  De- 
cember! We  shall  never  be  ready  in  time!"  Barbicane 
said  nothing,  but  his  silence  covered  serious  irritation. 

However,  daily  observations  revealed  a  certain  change 
going  on  in  the  state  of  the  ground.  About  the  15th  of 
August  the  vapors  ejected  had  sensibly  diminished  in  in- 
tensity and  thickness.  Some  days  afterwards  the  earth 
exhaled  only  a  slight  puff  of  smoke,  the  last  breath  of  the 
monster  enclosed  within  its  circle  of  stone.  Little  by  little 
the  belt  of  heat  contracted,  until  on  the  226.  of  August 
Barbicane,  his  colleagues,  and  the  engineer  were  enabled 
to  set  foot  on  the  iron  sheet  which  lay  level  upon  the  sum- 
mit of  Stones  Hill. 

"  At  last !  "  exclaimed  the  President  of  the  Gun  Club, 
with  an  immense  sigh  of  relief. 

The  work  was  resumed  the  same  day.  They  proceeded 
at  once  to  extract  the  interior  mold,  for  the  purpose  of 
clearing  out  the  boring  of  the  piece.  Pickaxes  and  boring 
irons  were  set  to  work  without  intermission.  The  clayey 
and  sandy  soils  had  acquired  extreme  hardness  under  the 
action  of  the  heat;  but  by  the  aid  of  the  machines,  the  rub- 
bish on  being  dug  out  was  rapidly  carted  away  on  railway 
wagons;  and  such  was  the  ardor  of  the  work,  so  persuasive 
the  arguments  of  Barbicane's  dollars,  that  by  the  3d  of 
September  all  traces  of  the  mold  had  entirely  disappeared. 

Immediately  the  operation  of  boring  was  commenced; 
and  by  the  aid  of  powerful  machines,  a  few  weeks  later, 
the  inner  surface  of  the  immense  tube  had  been  rendered 
perfectly  cylindrical,  and  the  bore  of  the  piece  had  ac- 
quired a  thorough  polish. 

At  length,  on  the  226.  of  September,  less  than  a  twelve- 
month after  Barbicane's  original  proposition,  the  enormous 
weapon,  accurately  bored,  and  exactly  vertically  pointed, 
was  ready  for  work.  There  was  only  the  moon  now  to 
wait  for;  and  they  were  pretty  sure  that  she  would  not  fail 
in  the  rendezvous. 

The  ecstasy  of  J.  T.  Maston  knew  no  bounds,  and  he 
narrowly  escaped  a  frightful  fall  while  staring  down  the 
tube.  But  for  the  strong  hand  of  Colonel  Blomsberry,  the 
worthy  secretary,  like  a  modern  Erostratus,  would  have 
found  his  death  in  the  depths  of  the  Columbiad. 

The  cannon  was  then  finished;  there  was  no  possible 


196      FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

doubt  as  to  its  perfect  completion.  So,  on  the  6th  of  Oc- 
tober, Captain  Nicholl  opened  an  account  between  himself 
and  President  Barbicane,  in  which  he  debted  himself  to 
the  latter  in  the  sum  of  2,000  dollars.  One  may  believe 
that  the  captain's  wrath  was  increased  to  its  highest  point, 
and  must  have  made  him  seriously  ill.  However  he  had 
still  three  bets  of  three,  four,  and  five  thousand  dollars 
respectively;  and  if  he  gained  two  out  of  these,  his  posi- 
tion would  not  be  very  bad.  But  the  money  question  did 
not  enter  into  his  calculations;  it  was  the  success  of  his 
rival  in  casting  a  cannon  against  which  iron  plates  sixty 
feet  thick  would  have  been  ineffectual,  that  dealt  him  a 
terrible  blow. 

After  the  23d  of  September  the  enclosure  of  Stones  Hill 
was  thrown  open  to  the  public;  and  it  will  be  easily  imag- 
ined what  was  the  concourse  of  visitors  to  this  spot !  •  There 
was  an  incessant  flow  of  people  to  and  from  Tampa  Town 
and  the  place,  which  resembled  a  procession  or  rather,  in 
fact,  a  pilgrimage. 

It  was  already  clear  to  be  seen  that,  on  the  day  of  the  ex- 
periment itself,  the  aggregate  of  spectators  ^  would  be 
counted  by  millions;  for  they  were  already  arriving  from 
all  parts  of  the  earth  upon  this  narrow  strip  of  promontory. 
Europe  was  emigrating  to  America. 

Up  to  that  time,  however,  it  must  be  confessed,  the  cu- 
riosity of  the  numerous  comers  was  but  scantily  gratified. 
Most  had  counted  upon  witnessing  the  spectacle  of  the 
casting,  and  they  were  treated  to  nothing  but  smoke. 
This  was  sorry  food  for  hungry  eyes;  but  Barbicane  would 
admit  no  one  to  that  operation.  Then  ensued  grumbling, 
discontent,  and  murmurs ;  they  blamed  the  president,  taxed 
him  with  dictatorial  conduct.  His  proceedings  were  de- 
clared "  un-American."  There  was  very  nearly  a!  riot 
round  Stones  Hill;  but  Barbicane  remained  inflexible. 
When,  however,  the  Columbiad  was  entirely  finished,  this 
state  of  closed  doors  could  no  longer  be  maintained;  be- 
sides it  would  have  been  bad  taste,  and  even  imprudence, 
to  affront  the  public  feeling.  Barbicane,  therefore^  opened 
the  enclosure  to  all  comers;  but,  true  to  his  practical  dis- 
position, he  determined  to  coin  money  out  of  the  public 
curiosity. 

It  was  something,  indeed,  to  be  enabled  to  contemplate 


THE  COLUMBIAD  197 

this  immense  Columbiad;  but  to  descend  into  its  depths, 
this  seemed  to  the  Americans  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  earthly 
felicity.  Consequently,  there  was  not  one  curious  specta- 
tor who  was  not  willing  to  give  himself  the  treat  of  visit- 
ing the  interior  of  this  metallic  abyss.  Baskets  suspended 
from  steam-cranes  permitted  them  to  satisfy  their  curiosity. 
There  was  a  perfect  mania.  Women,  children,  old  men, 
all  made  it  a  point  of  duty  to  penetrate  the  mysteries  of  the 
colossal  gun.  The  fare  for  the  descent  was  fixed  at  five 
dollars  per  head;  and,  despite  this  high  charge,  during  the 
two  months  which  preceded  the  experiment,  the  influx  of 
visitors  enabled  the  Gun  Club  to  pocket  nearly  500,000 
dollars ! 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  first  visitors  of  the  Colum- 
biad were  the  members  of  the  Gun  Club.  This  privilege 
was  justly  reserved  for  that  illustrious  body.  The  cere- 
mony took  place  on  the  25th  of  September.  A  basket  of 
honor  took  down  the  President,  J.  T.  Maston,  Major  Elph- 
instone,  General  Morgan,  Colonel  Blomsberry,  and  other 
members  of  the  club,  to  the  number  of  ten  in  all.  How  hot 
it  was  at  the  bottom  of  that  long  tube  of  metal !  They  were 
half  suffocated.  But  what  delight!  What  ecstasy!  A 
table  had  been  laid  with  six  covers  on  the  massive  stone 
which  formed  the  bottom  of  the  Columbiad,  and  lighted 
by  a  jet  of  electric  light  resembling  that  of  day  itself.  Nu- 
merous exquisite  dishes,  which  seemed  to  descend  from 
heaven,  were  placed  successively  before  the  guests,  and  the 
richest  wines  of  France  flowed  in  profusion  during  this 
splendid  repast,  served  nine  hundred  feet  beneath  the  sur- 
face of  the  earth! 

The  festival  was  animated,  not  to  say  somewhat  noisy. 
Toasts  flew  backwards  and  forwards.  They  drank  to  the 
earth  and  to  her  satellite,  to  the  Gun  Club,  the  Union,  the 
moon,  Diana,  Phoebe,  Selene,  the  "  peaceful  courier  of  the 
night !  "  All  the  hurrahs  carried  upwards  upon  the  sonor- 
ous waves  of  the  immense  acoustic  tube,  arrived  with  the 
sound  of  thunder  at  its  mouth;  and  the  multitude  ranged 
round  Stones  Hill  heartily  united  their  shouts  with  those 
of  the  ten  revelers  hidden  from  view  at  the  bottom  of  the! 
gigantic  Columbiad. 

J.  T.  Maston  was  no  longer  master  of  himself.  Whether 
he  shouted  or  gesticulated,  ate  or  drank  most,  would  be  a. 


198       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

difficult  matter  to  determine.  At  all  events,  he  would  not 
have  given  his  place  up  for  an  empire,  "  not  even  if  the 
cannon — loaded,  primed,  and  fired  at  that  very  moment — 
were  to  blow  him  in  pieces  into  the  planetary  world." 


CHAPTER    XVII 

A  TELEGRAPHIC  DISPATCH 

The  great  works  undertaken  by  the  Gun  Club  had  now 
virtually  come  to  an  end;  and  two  months  still  remained 
before  the  day  for  the  discharge  of  the  shot  to  the  moon. 
To  the  general  impatience  these  two  months  appeared  as 
long  as  years !  Hitherto  the  smallest  details  of  the  opera- 
tion had  been  daily  chronicled  by  the  journals,  which  the 
public  devoured  with  eager  eyes. 

Just  at  this  moment  a  circumstance,  the  most  unexpected, 
the  most  extraordinary  and  incredible,  occurred  to  rouse 
afresh  their  panting  spirits,  and  to  throw  every  mind  into 
a  state  of  the  most  violent  excitement. 

One  day,  the  30th  of  September,  at  3  147  p.  m.,  a  tele- 
gram, transmitted  by  cable  from  Valentia  (Ireland)  to 
Newfoundland  and  the  American  mainland,  arrived  at  the 
address  of  President  Barbicane. 

The  president  tore  open  the  envelope,  read  the  dispatch 
and,  despite  his  remarkable  powers  of  self-control,  his  lips 
turned  pale  and  his  eyes  grew  dim. 

Here  is  the  text  of  the  dispatch,  which  figures  now  in 
the  archives  of  the  Gun  Club : 

"  France,  Paris, 
"  30  September,  4  a.  m. 
"  Barbicane,  Tampa  Town,  Florida,  United  States. 

"  Substitute  for  your  spherical  shell  a  cylindro-conical 
projectile.  I  shall  go  inside.  Shall  arrive  by  steamer  At- 
lanta. Michel  Ardan." 

CHAPTER   XVIII 

THE  PASSENGER  OF  THE  "  ATLANTA." 

If  this  astounding  news,  instead  of  flying  through  the 
electric  wires,  had  simply  arrived  by  post  in  the  ordinary 
sealed  envelope,  Barbicane  would  not  have  hesitated  a  mo- 


THE  PASSENGER  OF  THE  "  ATLANTA* n     199 

ment.  He  would  have  held  his  tongue  about  it,  both  as  a 
measure  of  prudence,  and  in  order  not  to  have  to  reconsider 
his  plans.  This  telegram  might  be  a  cover  for  some  jest, 
especially  as  it  came  from  a  Frenchman.  What  human  be- 
ing would  ever  have  conceived  the  idea  of  such  a  journey? 
and,  if  such  a  person  really  existed,  he  must  be  an  idiot, 
whom  one  would  shut  up  in  a  lunatic  ward,  rather  than 
within  the  walls  of  the  projectile. 

The  contents  of  the  dispatch,  however,  speedily  became 
known;  for  the  telegraphic  officials  possessed  but  little  dis- 
cretion, and  Michel  Ardan's  proposition  ran  at  once 
throughout  the  several  States  of  the  Union.  Barbicane 
•had,  therefore,  no  further  motive  for  keeping  silence. 
Consequently  he  called  together  such  of  his  colleagues  as 
were  at  the  moment  in  Tampa  Town,  and  without  any  ex- 
pression of  his  own  opinions  simply  read  to  them  the  la- 
conic text  itself.  It  was  received  with  every  possible  va- 
riety of  expressions  of  doubt,  incredulity,  and  derision 
from  everyone,  with  the  exception  of  J.  T.  Maston,  who 
exclaimed,  "  It  is  a  grand  idea,  however!" 

When  Barbicane  originally  proposed  to  send  a  shot  to 
the  moon  everyone  looked  upon  the  enterprise  as  simple 
and  practical  enough — a  mere  question  of  gunnery;  but 
when  a  person,  professing  to  be  a  reasonable  being,  offered 
to  take  passage  within  the  projectile,  the  whole  thing  be- 
came a  farce,  or,  in  plainer  language,  a  humbug. 

One  question,  however,  remained.  Did  such  a  being 
exist?  This  telegram  flashed  across  the  depths  of  the  At- 
lantic, the  designation  of  the  vessel  on  board  which  he  was 
to  take  his  passage,  the  date  assigned  for  his  speedy  ar- 
rival, all  combined  to  impart  a  certain  character  of  reality 
to  the  proposal.  They  must  get  some  clearer  notion  of 
the  matter.  Scattered  groups  of  inquirers  at  length  con- 
densed themselves  into  a  compact  crowd,  which  made 
straight  for  the  residence  of  President  Barbicane.  That 
worthy  individual  was  keeping  quiet  with  the  intention  of 
watching  events  as  they  arose.  But  he  had  forgotten  to 
take  into  account  the  public  impatience;  md  it  was  with  no 
pleasant  countenance  that  he  watched  the  population  of 
Tampa  Town  gathering  under  his  windows.  The  mur- 
murs and  vociferations  below  presently  obliged  him  to 
appear.     He  came  forward,  therefore,  and  on  silence  being 


200       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

procured,  a  citizen  put  point-blank  to  him  the  following 
question :  "  Is  the  person  mentioned  in  the  telegram 
under  the  name  of  Michel  Ardan,  on  his  way  here?  Yes 
or  no." 

"  Gentlemen,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  I  know  no  more  than 
you  do." 

"  We  must  know,"  roared  the  impatient  voices. 

"  Time  will  show,"  calmly  replied  the  president. 

"  Time  has  no  business  to  keep  a  whole  country  in  sus- 
pense," replied  the  orator.  "  Have  you  altered  the  plans 
of  the  projectile  according  to  the  request  of  the  telegram?  " 

"Not  yet,  gentlemen;  but  you  are  right!  we  must  have 
better  information  to  go  by.  The  telegraph  must  complete 
its  information." 

"  To  the  telegraph!  "  roared  the  crowd. 

Barbicane  descended;  and  heading  the  immense  assem- 
blage, led  the  way  to  the  telegraph  office.  A  few  minutes 
later  a  telegram  was  dispatched  to  the  secretary  of  the  un- 
derwriters at  Liverpool,  requesting  answers  to  the  follow- 
ing queries  : 

"About  the  ship  Atlanta — when  did  she  leave  Europe? 
Had  she  on  board  a  Frenchman  named  Michel  Ardan?" 

Two  hours  afterwards  Barbicane  received  information 
too  exact  to  leave  any  room  for  the  smallest  remaining 
doubt. 

"  The  steamer  Atlanta  from  Liverpool  put  to  sea  on  the 
2nd  of  October,  bound  for  Tampa  Town,  having  on  board 
a  Frenchman  borne  on  the  list  of  passengers  by  the  name 
of  Michel  Ardan." 

That  very  evening  he  wrote  to  the  house  of  Breadwill 
and  Co.,  requesting  them  to  suspend  the  casting  of  the 
projectile  until  the  receipt  of  further  orders.  On  the  20th 
of  October,  at  9  a.  m.,  the  semaphores  of  the  Bahama  Ca- 
nal signaled  a  thick  smoke  on  the  horizon.  Two  hours 
later  a  large  steamer  exchanged  signals  with  them.  The 
name  of  the  Atlanta  flew  at  once  over  Tampa  Town.  At 
four  o'clock  the  English  vessel  entered  the  Bay  of  Espiritu 
Santo.  At  five  it  crossed  the  passage  of  Hillisborough  Bay 
at  full  steam.  At  six  she  cast  anchor  at  Port  Tampa.  The 
anchor  had  scarcely  caught  the  sandy  bottom  when  500 
boats  surrounded  the  Atlanta,  and  the  steamer  was  taken 
by  assault.     Barbicane  was  the  first  to  set  foot  on  deck, 


THE  PASSENGER  OF  THE  *  ATLANTA  "     201 

and  in  a  voice  of  which  he  vainly  tried  to  conceal  the  emo- 
tion, called  "  Michel  Ardan." 

"  Here !  "  replied  an  individual  perched  on  the  poop. 

Barbicane,  with  arms  crossed,  looked  fixedly  at  the  pas- 
senger of  the  Atlanta. 

He  was  a  man  of  about  42  years  of  age,  of  large  build, 
but  slightly  round  shouldered.  His  massive  head  momen- 
tarily shook  a  shock  of  reddish  hair,  which  resembled  a 
lion's  mane.  His  face  was  short  with  a  broad  forehead, 
and  furnished  with  a  moustache  as  bristly  as  a  cat's,  and 
little  patches  of  yellowish  whisker  upon  full  cheeks. 
Round,  wildish  eyes,  slightly  near-sighted,  completed  a 
physiognomy  essentially  feline.  His  nose  was  firmly 
shaped,  his  mouth  particularly  sweet  in  expression,  high 
forehead,  intelligent  and  furrowed  with  wrinkles  like  a 
newly-plowed  field.  The  body  was  powerfully  devel- 
oped and  firmly  fixed  upon  long  legs.  Muscular  arms,  and 
a  general  air  of  decision  gave  him  the  appearance  of  a 
hardy,  jolly  companion.  He  was  dressed  in  a  suit  of  am- 
ple dimensions,  loose  neckerchief,  open  shirt-collar,  dis- 
closing a  robust  neck ;  his  cuffs  were  invariably  unbuttoned, 
through  which  appeared  a  pair  of  red  hands. 

On  the  bridge  of  the  steamer,  in  the  midst  of  the  crowd, 
he  bustled  to  and  fro,  never  still  for  a  moment,  "  dragging 
his  anchors,"  as  the  sailors  say,  gesticulating,  making  free 
with  everybody,  biting  his  nails  with  nervous  avidity.  He 
was  one  of  those  originals  which  nature  sometimes  invents 
in  the  freak  of  a  moment,  and  of  which  she  then  breaks  the 
mold. 

Amongst  other  peculiarities,  this  curiosity  gave  himself 
out  for  a  sublime  ignoramus,  "  like  Shakespeare,"  and  pro- 
fessed supreme  contempt  for  all  scientific  men.  Those 
"  fellows,"  as  he  called  them,  "  are  only  fit  to  mark  the 
points,  while  we  play  the  game."  He  was,  in  fact,  a 
thorough  Bohemian,  adventurous  but  not  an  adventurer; 
a  hair-brained  fellow,  a  kind  of  Icarus,  only  possessing 
relays  of  wings.  For  the  rest,  he  was  ever  in  scrapes,  end- 
ing invariably  by  falling  on  his  feet,  like  those  little  pith 
figures  which  they  sell  for  children's  toys.  In  two  words, 
his  motto  was  "  I  have  my  opinions,"  and  the  love  of  the 
impossible  constituted  his  ruling  passion. 

Such  was  the  passenger  of  the  Atlanta,  always  excitable, 


202       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

as  if  boiling  under  the  action  of  some  internal  fire  by  the 
character  of  his  physical  organization.  If  ever  two  indi- 
viduals offered  a  striking  contrast  to  each  other,  these  were 
certainly  Michel  Ardan  and  the  Yankee  Barbicane;  both, 
moreover,  being  equally  enterprising  and  daring,  each  in 
his  own  way. 

The  scrutiny  which  the  president  of  the  Gun  Club  had 
instituted  regarding  this  new  rival  was  quickly  interrupted 
by  the  shouts  and  hurrahs  of  the  crowd.  The  cries  be- 
came at  last  so  uproarious,  and  the  popular  enthusiasm 
assumed  so  personal  a  form,  that  Michel  Ardan,  after  hav- 
ing shaken  hands  some  thousands  of  times,  at  the  imminent 
risk  of  leaving  his  fingers  behind  him,  was  fain  at  last  to 
make  a  bolt  for  his  cabin. 

Barbicane  followed  him  without  uttering  a  word. 

"  You  are  Barbicane,  I  suppose  ?  "  said  Michel  Ardan  in 
a  tone  of  voice  in  which  he  would  have  addressed  a  friend 
of  twenty  years'  standing. 

"  Yes,"  replied  the  president  of  the  G.  C. 

"  All  right !  how  d'ye  do,  Barbicane  ?  how  are  you  getting 
on — pretty  well?  that's  right." 

"  So,"  said  Barbicane,  without  further  preliminary,  "  you 
are  quite  determined  to  go." 

"  Quite  decided." 

"Nothing  will  stop  you?" 

"Nothing.  Have  you  modified  your  projectile  accord- 
ing to  my  telegram." 

"  I  waited  your  arrival.  But,"  asked  Barbicane  again, 
"have  you  carefully  reflected?" 

"  Reflected  ?  have  I  any  time  to  spare  ?  I  find  an  oppor- 
tunity of  making  a  tour  in  the  moon,  and  I  mean  to  profit 
by  it.     There  is  the  whole  gist  of  the  matter." 

Barbicane  looked  hard  at  this  man  who  spoke  so  lightly 
of  his  project  with  such  complete  absence  of  anxiety. 
"  But,  at  least,"  said  he,  "  you  have  some  plans,  some  means 
of  carrying  your  project  into  execution?  " 

"  Excellent,  my  dear  Barbicane ;  only  permit  me  to  offer 
one  remark : — My  wish  is  to  tell  my  story  once  for  all,  to 
everybody,  and  then  to  have  done  with  it;  then  there  will 
be  no  need  for  recapitulation.  So,  if  you  have  no  objec- 
tion, assemble  your  friends,  colleagues,  the  whole  town,  all 
Florida,  all  America  if  you  like,  and  to-morrow  I  shall  be 


THE  PASSENGER  OF  THE  "  ATLANTA  "     203 

ready  to  explain  my  plans  and  answer  any  objections  what- 
ever that  may  be  advanced.  You  may  rest  assured  I  shall 
wait  without  stirring.     Will  that  suit  you?" 

"  All  right,"  replied  Barbicane. 

So  saying,  the  president  left  the  cabin  and  informed  the 
crowd  of  the  proposal  of  Michel  Ardan.  His  words  were 
received  with  clappings  of  hands  and  shouts  of  joy.  They 
had  removed  all  difficulties.  To-morrow  everyone  would 
contemplate  at  his  ease  this  European  hero.  However, 
some  of  the  spectators,  more  infatuated  than  the  rest, 
would  not  leave  the  deck  of  the  Atlanta.  They  passed  the 
night  on  board.  Amongst  others,  J.  T.  Maston  got  his 
hook  fixed  in  the  combing  of  the  poop,  and  it  pretty  nearly 
required  the  capstan  to  get  it  out  again. 

"  He  is  a  hero !  a  hero ! "  he  cried,  a  theme  of  which  he 
was  never  tired  of  ringing  the  changes;  "  and  we  are  only 
like  weak,  silly  women,  compared  with  this  European!  " 

As  to  the  president,  after  having  suggested  to  the  visitors 
it  was  time  to  retire,  he  re-entered  the  passenger's  cabin, 
and  remained  there  till  the  bell  of  the  steamer  made  it 
midnight. 

But  then  the  two  rivals  in  popularity  shook  hands  heartily 
and  parted  on  terms  of  intimate  friendship. 


CHAPTER   XIX 

A    MONSTER    MEETING 

On  the  following  day  Barbicane,  fearing  that  indiscreet 
questions  might  be  put  to  Michel  Ardan  was  desirous  of 
reducing  the  number  of  the  audience  to  a  few  of  the  ini- 
tiated, his  own  colleagues  for  instance.  He  might  as  well 
have  tried  to  check  the  Falls  of  Niagara!  He  was  com- 
pelled, therefore,  to  give  up  the  idea,  and  to  let  his  new 
friend  run  the  chances  of  a  public  conference.  The  place 
chosen  for  this  monster  meeting  was  a  vast  plain  situated 
in  the  rear  of  the  town.  In  a  few  hours,  thanks  to  the  help 
of  the  shipping  in  port,  an  immense  roofing  of  canvas  was 
stretched  over  the  parched  prairie,  and  protected  it  from 
the  burning  rays  of  the  sun.  There  300,000  people  braved 
for  many  hours  the  stifling  heat  while  awaiting  the  arrival 
of  the  Frenchman.     Of  this  crowd  of  spectators  a  first  set 


204       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

could  both  see  and  hear;  a  second  set  saw  badly  and  heard 
nothing  at  all;  and  as  for  the  third,  it  could  neither  see  nor 
hear  anything  at  all.     At  three  o'clock  Michel  Ardan  made 
his  appearance,  accompanied  by  the  principal  members  of 
the  Gun  Club.     He  was  supported  on  his  right  by  President 
Barbicane,  and  on  his  left  by  J.  T.  Maston,  more  radiant 
than  the  midday  sun  and  nearly  as  ruddy.     Ardan  mounted 
a  platform,  from  the  top  of  which  his  view  extended  over  a 
sea  of  black  hats.     He  exhibited  not  the  slightest  embar- 
rassment; he  was  just  as  gay,  familiar,  and  pleasant  as  if 
he  were  at  home.     To  the  hurrahs  which  greeted  him  he 
replied  by  a  graceful  bow;  then,  waving  his  hand  to  request 
silence,  he  spoke  in  perfectly  correct  English  as  follows : 
"  Gentlemen,  despite  the  very  hot  weather  I  request  your 
patience  for  a  short  time  while  I  offer  some  explanations 
regarding  the  projects  which  seem  to  have  so  interested 
you.    I  am  neither  an  orator  nor  a  man  of  science,  and  I 
had  no  idea  of  addressing  you  in  public;  but  my  friend 
Barbicane  has  told  me  that  you  would  like  to  hear  me, 
and  I  am  quite  at  your  service.     Listen  to  me,  therefore, 
with  your  600,000  ears,  and  please  to  excuse  the  faults  of 
the  speaker.    Now  pray  do  not  forget  that  you  see  before 
you  a  perfect  ignoramus,  whose  ignorance  goes  so  far  that 
he  can  not  even  understand  the  difficulties!     It  seemed  to 
him  that  it  was  a  matter  quite  simple,  natural,  and  easy  to 
take  one's  place  in  a  projectile  and  start  for  the  moon! 
That  journey  must  be  undertaken  sooner  or  later;  and,  as 
for  the  mode  of  locomotion  adopted,  it  follows  simply  the 
law  of  progress.    Man  began  by  walking  on  all- fours ;  then, 
one  fine  day,  on  two  feet;  then  in  a  carriage;  then  in  a 
stage-coach;  and  lastly  by  railway.    Well,  the  projectile  is 
the  vehicle  of  the  future,  and  the  planets  themselves  are 
nothing  else !    Noav  some  of  you,  gentlemen,  may  imagine 
that  the  velocity  we  propose  to  impart  to  it  is  extravagant. 
It  is  nothing  of  the  kind.    All  the  stars  exceed  it  in  rapidity, 
and  the  earth  itself  is  at  this  moment  carrying  us  round 
the  sun  at  three  times  as  rapid    a  rate,  and  yet  she  is  a 
mere  lounger  on  the  way  compared  with  many  others  of 
the  planets!     And  her  velocity  is  constantly  decreasing. 
Is  it  not  evident,  then,  I  ask  you,  that  there  will  some  day 
appear  velocities  far  greater  than  these,  of  which  light  or 
electricity  will  probably  be  the  mechanical  agent  ? 


A  MONSTER  MEETING  205 

"  Yes,  gentlemen,"  continued  the  orator,  "  in  spite  of  the 
opinions  of  certain  narrow-minded  people,  who  would  shut 
up  the  human  race  upon  this  globe,  as  within  some  magic 
circle  which  it  must  never  outstep,  we  shall  one  day  travel 
to  the  moon,  the  planets,  and  the  stars,  with  the  same  fa- 
cility, rapidity,  and  certainty  as  we  now  make  the  voyage 
from  Liverpool  to  New  York!  Distance  is  but  a  relative 
expression,  and  must  end  by  being  reduced  to  zero." 

The  assembly,  strongly  predisposed  as  they  were  in  favor 
of  the  French  hero,  were  staggered  at  this  bold  theory. 
Michel  Ardan  perceived  the  fact. 

"  Gentlemen,"  he  continued,  with  a  pleasant  smile,  "  you 
do  not  seem  quite  convinced.  Very  good!  Let  us  reason 
the  matter  out.  Do  you  know  how  long  it  would  take  for 
an  express  train  to  reach  the  moon?  Three  hundred  days; 
no  more!  And  what  is  that?  The  distance  is  no  more 
than  nine  times  the  circumference  of  the  earth ;  and  there 
are  no  sailors  or  travelers,  of  even  moderate  activity,  who 
have  not  made  longer  journeys  than  that  in  their  lifetime. 
And  now  consider  that  I  shall  be  only  ninety-seven  hours 
on  my  journey.  Ah !  I  see  you  are  reckoning  that  the  moon 
is  a  long  way  off  from  the  earth,  and  that  one  must  think 
twice  before  making  the  experiment.  What  would  you 
say,  then,  if  we  were  talking  of  going  to  Neptune,  which  re- 
volves at  a  distance  of  more  than  two  thousand  seven  hun- 
dred and  twenty  millions  of  miles  from  the  sun!  And  yet 
what  is  that  compared  with  the  distance  of  the  fixed  stars, 
some  of  which,  such  as  Arcturus,  are  at  billions  of  miles 
distant  from  us?  And  then  you  talk  of  the  distance  which 
separates  the  planets  from  the  sun!  And  there  are  people 
who  affirm  that  such  a  thing  as  distance  exists.  Absurdity, 
folly,  idiotic  nonsense!  Would  you  know  what  /  think  of 
our  own  solar  universe?  Shall  I  tell  you  my  theory?  It 
is  very  simple!  In  my  opinion  the  solar  system  is  a  solid, 
homogeneous  body;  the  planets  which  compose  it  are  in 
actual  contact  with  each  other;  and  whatever  space  exists 
between  them  is  nothing  more  than  the  space  which  sepa- 
rates the  molecules  of  the  densest  metals,  such  as  silver,  iron, 
or  platinum!  I  have  the  right,  therefore,  to  affirm,  and  I 
repeat  with  the  conviction  which  must  penetrate  all  your 
minds,  *  Distance  is  but  an  empty  name ;  distance  does  not 
really  exist!  * " 


206       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

"  Hurrah!"  cried  one  voice  (need  it  be  said  that  it  was 
that  of  J.  T.  Maston  ?)  "  Distance  does  not  exist!  "  And 
overcome  by  the  energy  of  his  movements,  he  nearly  fell 
from  the  platform  to  the  ground.  He  just  escaped  a  severe 
fall,  which  would  have  proved  to  him  that  distance  was  by 
no  means  an  empty  name. 

"  Gentlemen,"  resumed  the  orator,  "  I  repeat  that  the 
distance  between  the  earth  and  her  satellite  is  a  mere  trifle, 
and  undeserving  of  serious  consideration.  I  am  convinced 
that  before  twenty  years  are  over  one  half  of  our  earth 
will  have  paid  a  visit  to  the  moon.  Now,  my  worthy 
friends,  if  you  have  any  question  to  put  to  me,  you  will, 
I  fear,  sadly  embarrass  a  poor  man  like  myself ;  still,  I  will 
do  my  best  to  answer  you." 

Up  to  this  point  the  president  of  the  Gun  Club  had  been 
satisfied  with  the  turn  which  the  discussion  had  assumed. 
It  became  now,  however,  desirable  to  divert  Ardan  from 
questions  of  a  practical  nature,  with  which  he  was  doubtless 
far  less  conversant.  Barbicane,  therefore,  hastened  to  get  in 
a  word,  and  began  by  asking  his  new  friend  whether  he 
thought  that  the  moon  and  the  planets  were  inhabited. 

"  You  put  before  me  a  great  problem,  my  worthy  presi- 
dent," replied  the  orator,  smiling.  "  Still,  men  of  great  in- 
telligence, such  as  Plutarch,  Swedenborg,  Bernardin  de  St. 
Pierre,  and  others  have,  if  I  mistake  not,  pronounced  in 
the  affirmative.  Looking  at  the  question  from  the  natural 
philosopher's  point  of  view,  I  should  say  that  nothing  use- 
less existed  in  the  world ;  and,  replying  to  your  question  by 
another,  I  should  venture  to  assert,  that  if  these  worlds  are 
habitable,  they  either  are,  have  been,  or  will  be  inhabited." 

"  No  one  could  answer  more  logically  or  fairly,"  replied 
the  president.  "The  question  then  reverts  to  this:  Are 
these  worlds  habitable?  For  my  own  part  I  believe  they 
are." 

"  For  myself,  I  feel  certain  of  it,"  said  Michel  Ardan. 
"  Nevertheless,"  retorted  one  of  the  audience,  "  there  are 
many  arguments  against  the  habitability  of  the  worlds.  The 
conditions  of  life  must  evidently  be  greatly  modified  upon 
the  majority  of  them.  To  mention  only  the  planets  we 
should  be  either  broiled  alive  in  some,  or  frozen  to  death 
in  others  according  as  they  are  more  or  less  removed  from 
the  sun." 


A  MONSTER  MEETING  207 

"  I  regret,"  replied  Michel  Ardan,  "  that  I  have  not  the 
honor  of  personally  knowing  my  contradictor,  for  I  would 
have  attempted  to  answer  him.  His  objection  has  its  merits, 
I  admit;  but  I  think  we  may  successfully  combat  it,  as  well 
as  all  others  which  affect  the  habitability  of  the  other  worlds. 
If  I  were  a  natural  philosopher,  I  would  tell  him  that  if  less 
of  caloric  were  set  in  motion  upon  the  planets  which  are 
nearest  to  the  sun,  and  more,  on  the  contrary,  upon  those 
which  are  farthest  removed  from  it,  this  simple  fact  would 
alone  suffice  to  equalize  the  heat,  and  to  render  the  tempera- 
ture of  those  worlds  supportable  by  beings  organized  like 
ourselves.  If  I  were  a  naturalist,  I  would  tell  him  that,  ac- 
cording to  some  illustrious  men  of  science,  nature  has  fur- 
nished us  with  instances  upon  the  earth  of  animals  existing 
under  very  varying  conditions  of  life;  that  fish  respire  in  a 
medium  fatal  to  other  animals;  that  amphibious  creatures 
possess  a  double  existence  very  difficult  of  explanation;  that 
certain  denizens  of  the  seas  maintain  life  at  enormous 
depths,  and  there  support  a  pressure  equal  to  that  of  fifty 
or  sixty  atmospheres  without  being  crushed;  that  several 
aquatic  insects,  insensible  to  temperature,  are  met  with 
equally  among  boiling  springs  and  in  the  frozen  plains  of 
the  Polar  Sea;  in  fine,  that  we  cannot  help  recognizing 
in  nature  a  diversity  of  means  of  operation  oftentimes  in- 
comprehensible, but  not  the  less  real.  If  I  were  a  chemist, 
I  would  tell  him  that  the  aerolites,  bodies  evidently  formed 
exteriorly  of  our  terrestrial  globe,  have,  upon  analysis,  re- 
vealed indisputable  traces  of  carbon,  a  substance  which  owes 
its  origin  solely  to  organized  beings,  and  which,  according 
to  the  experiments  of  Reichenbach,  must  necessarily  itself 
have  been  endued  with  animation.  And  lastly,  were  I  a 
theologian,  I  would  tell  him  that  the  scheme  of  the  Divine 
Redemption,  according  to  St.  Paul,  seems  to  be  applicable, 
not  merely  to  the  earth,  but  to  all  the  celestial  worlds.  But, 
unfortunately,  I  am  neither  theologian,  nor  chemist,  nor 
naturalist,  nor  philosopher;  therefore,  in  my  absolute  ig- 
norance of  the  great  laws  which  govern  the  universe,  I  con- 
fine myself  to  saying  in  reply,  '  I  do  not  know  whether  the 
worlds  are  inhabited  or  not;  and  since  I  do  not  know, 
I  am  going  to  see! '  " 

Whether  Michel  Ardan's  antagonist  hazarded  any  fur- 
ther arguments  or  not  it  is  impossible  to  say,  for  the  up- 


208       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

roarious  shouts  of  the  crowd  would  not  allow  any  expression 
of  opinion  to  gain  a  hearing.  On  silence  being  restored,  the 
triumphant  orator  contented  himself  with  adding  the  fol- 
lowing remarks: 

"Gentlemen,  you  will  observe  that  I  have  but  slightly 
touched  upon  this  great  question.  There  is  another  al- 
together different  line  of  arguments  in  favor  of  the  habit- 
ability  of  the  stars,  which  I  omit  for  the  present;  I  only  de- 
sire to  call  attention  to  one  point.  To  those  who  maintain 
that  the  planets  are  not  inhabited  one  may  reply:  You 
might  be  perfectly  in  the  right,  if  you  could  only  show  that 
the  earth  is  the  best  possible  world,  spite  of  what  Voltaire 
has  said.  She  has  but  one  satellite,  while  Jupiter,  Uranus, 
Saturn,  Neptune  have  each  several,  an  advantage  by  no 
means  to  be  despised.  But  that  which  renders  our  own 
globe  so  uncomfortable  is  the  inclination  of  its  axis  to  the 
plane  of  its  orbit.  Hence  the  inequality  of  days  and  nights ; 
hence  the  disagreeable  diversity  of  the  seasons.  On  the 
surface  of  our  unhappy  spheroid  we  are  always  either  too 
hot  or  too  cold ;  we  are  frozen  in  winter,  broiled  in  sum- 
mer; it  is  the  planet  of  rheumatism,  coughs,  bronchitis; 
while  on  the  surface  of  Jupiter,  for  example,  where  the 
axis  is  but  slightly  inclined,  the  inhabitants  may  enjoy  uni- 
form temperatures.  It  possesses  zones  of  perpetual  springs, 
summers,  autumns,  and  winters;  every  Jovian  may  choose 
for  himself  what  climate  he  likes,  and  there  spend  the  whole 
of  his  life  in  security  from  all  variations  of  temperature. 
You  will,  I  am  sure,  readily  admit  this  superiority  of 
Jupiter  over  our  own  planet,  to  say  nothing  of  his  years, 
which  each  equal  twelve  of  ours !  Under  such  auspices,  and 
such  marvelous  conditions  of  existence,  it  appears  to  me 
that  the  inhabitants  of  so  fortunate  a  world  must  be  in 
every  respect  superior  to  ourselves.  All  we  require  in  order 
to  attain  to  such  perfection,  is  the  mere  trifle  of  having  an 
axis  of  rotation  less  inclined  to  the  plane  of  its  orbit." 

"  Hurrah!  "  roared  an  energetic  voice,  "  let  us  unite  our 
efforts,  invent  the  necessary  machines,  and  rectify  the  earth's 
axis ! " 

A  thunder  of  applause  followed  this  proposal,  the  author 
of  which  was,  of  course,  no  other  than  J.  T.  Maston.  And, 
in  all  probability,  if  the  truth  must  be  told,  if  the  Yankees 
could  only  have  found  a  point  of  application  for  it,  they 


A  MONSTER  MEETING  209 

would  have  constructed  a  lever  capable  of  raising  the  earth 
and  rectifying  its  axis.  It  was  just  this  deficiency  which 
baffled  these  daring  mechanicians. 


CHAPTER  XX 

ATTACK  AND  RIPOSTE 

As  soon  as  the  excitement  had  subsided,  the  following 
words  were  heard  uttered  in  a  strong  and  determined 
voice : 

"  Now  that  the  speaker  has  favored  us  with  so  much 
imagination,  would  he  be  so  good  as  to  return  to  his  sub- 
ject, and  give  us  a  little  practical  view  of  the  question  ?  " 

All  eyes  were  directed  towards  the  person  who  spoke. 
He  was  a  little  dried-up  man,  of  an  active  figure,  with  an 
American  "goatee"  beard.  Profiting  by  the  different 
movements  in  the  crowd,  he  had  managed  by  degrees  to 
gain  the  front  row  of  spectators.  There,  with  arms  crossed 
and_ stern  gaze,  he  watched  the  hero  of  the  meeting.  After 
having  put  his  question  he  remained  silent,  and  appeared 
to  take  no  notice  of  the  thousands  of  looks  directed  towards 
himself  nor  of  the  murmur  of  disapprobation  excited  by  his 
words.  Meeting  at  first  with  no  reply,  he  repeated  his  ques- 
tion with  marked  emphasis,  adding :  "  We  are  here  to  talk 
about  the  moon  and  not  about  the  earth/' 

"You  are  right,  sir,"  replied  Michel  A'rdan;  "the  dis- 
cussion has  become  irregular.    We  will  return  to  the  moon." 

"  Sir,"  said  the  unknown,  "  you  pretend  that  our  satel- 
lite is  inhabited.  Very  good;  but  if  Selenites  do  exist,  that 
race  of  beings  assuredly  must  live  without  breathing,  for— 
I  warn  you  for  your  own  sake — there  is  not  the  smallest 
particle  of  air  on  the  surface  of  the  moon." 

At  this  remark  Ardan  pushed  up  his  shock  of  red  hair; 
he  saw  that  he  was  on  the  point  of  being  involved  in  a 
struggle  with  this  person  upon  the  very  gist  of  the  whole 
question.    He  looked  sternly  at  him  in  his  turn  and  said : 

"  Oh!  so  there  is  no  air  in  the  moon?  And  pray,  if  you 
are  so  good,  who  ventures  to  affirm  that?  " 

"  The  men  of  science." 

"Really?" 

"Really." 


210      FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

"  Sir,"  replied  Michel,  "  pleasantry  apart,  I  have  a  pro- 
found respect  for  men  of  science  who  do  possess  science, 
but  a  profound  contempt  for  men  of  science  who  do  not." 

"  Do  you  know  any  who  belong  to  the  latter  category?  " 

"  Decidedly.  In  France  there  are  some  who  maintain 
that,  mathematically,  a  bird  cannot  possibly  fly ;  and  others 
who  demonstrate  theoretically  that  fishes  were  never  made 
to  live  in  water." 

"  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  persons  of  that  description, 
and  I  can  quote,  in  support  of  my  statement,  names  which 
you  can  not  refuse  deference  to." 

"Then,  sir,  you  will  sadly  embarrass  a  poor  ignorant, 
who,  besides,  asks  nothing  better  than  to  learn." 

"  Why,  then,  do  you  introduce  scientific  questions  if  you 
have  never  studied  them  ?  "  asked  the  unknown,  somewhat 
coarsely. 

"  For  the  reason  that '  he  is  always  brave  who  never  sus- 
pects danger.'  I  know  nothing,  it  is  true ;  but  it  is  precisely 
my  very  weakness  which  constitutes  my  strength." 

"  Your  weakness  amounts  to  folly,"  retorted  the  un- 
known in  a  passion. 

" All  the  better,"  replied  our  Frenchman,  "if  it  carries 
me  up  to  the  moon." 

Barbicane  and  his  colleagues  devoured  with  their  eyes 
the  intruder  who  had  so  boldly  placed  himself  in  antagonism 
to  their  enterprise.  Nobody  knew  him,  and  the  president, 
uneasy  as  to  the  result  of  so  free  a  discussion,  watched  his 
new  friend  with  some  anxiety.  The  meeting  began  to  be 
somewhat  fidgety  also,  for  the  contest  directed  their  atten- 
tion to  the  dangers,  if  not  the  actual  impossibilities,  of  the 
proposed  expedition. 

"  Sir,"  replied  Ardan's  antagonist,  "  there  are  many  and 
incontrovertible  reasons  which  prove  the  absence  of  an  at- 
mosphere in  the  moon.  I  might  say  that,  a  priori,  if  one 
ever  did  exist,  it  must  have  been  absorbed  by  the  earth ;  but 
I  prefer  to  bring  forward  indisputable  facts." 

"  Let  us  proceed,"  replied  Ardan,  with  perfect  coolness, 
"  and  come  to  one  important  fact.  A  skillful  French  as- 
tronomer, M.  Laussedat,  in  watching  the  eclipse  of  July 
18,  i860,  proved  that  the  horns  of  the  solar  crescent  were 
rounded  and  truncated.  Now,  this  appearance  could  only 
have  been  produced  by  a  deviation  of  the  solar  rays  in 


ATTACK   AND    RIPOSTE  211 

traversing  the  atmosphere  of  the  moon.  There  is  no  other 
possible  explanation  of  the  fact." 

A  counter  movement  here  took  place  in  favor  of  the  hero 
of  the  meeting,  whose  opponent  was  now  reduced  to  silence. 
Ardan  resumed  the  conversation;  and,  without  exhibiting 
any  exultation  at  the  advantage  he  had  gained,  simply 
said :  "  You  see,  then,  my  dear  sir,  we  must  not  pronounce 
with  absolute  positiveness  against  the  existence  of  an  atmos- 
phere in  the  moon.  That  atmosphere  is,  probably,  of  ex- 
treme rarity,  nevertheless  at  the  present  day  science  gener- 
ally admits  that  it  exists." 

"  Not  in  the  mountains,  at  all  events,"  returned  the  un- 
known, unwilling  to  give  in. 

"  No!  but  at  the  bottom  of  the  valleys,  and  not  exceeding 
a  few  hundred  feet  in  height." 

"  In  any  case  you  will  do  well  to  take  every  precaution, 
for  the  air  will  be  terribly  rarefied." 

"  My  good  sir,  there  will  always  be  enough  for  a  solitary 
individual;  besides,  once  arrived  up  there,  I  shall  do  my 
best  to  economize,  and  not  to  breathe  except  on  grand  oc- 
casions ! " 

A  tremendous  roar  of  laughter  rang  in  the  ears  of  the 
mysterious  interlocutor,  who  glared  fiercely  round  upon  the 
assembly. 

"  Then,"  continued  Ardan,  with  a  careless  air,  "  since 
we  are  in  accord  regarding  the  presence  of  a  certain  atmos- 
phere, we  are  forced  to  admit  the  presence  of  a  certain 
quantity  of  water.  This  is  a  happy  consequence  for  me. 
Moreover,  my  amiable  contradictor,  permit  me  to  submit  to 
you  one  further  observation.  We  only  know  one  side  of 
the  moon's  disc;  and  if  there  is  but  little  air  on  the  face 
presented  to  us,  it  is  possible  that  there  is  plenty  on  the  one 
turned  away  from  us." 

"  And  for  what  reason?  " 

"Because  the  moon,  under  the  action  of  the  earth's  at- 
traction, has  assumed  the  form  of  an  egg,  which  we  look  at 
from  the  smaller  end.  Hence  it  follows,  by  Hausen's  cal- 
culations, that  its  center  of  gravity  is  situated  in  the  other 
hemisphere.  Hence  it  results  that  the  great  mass  of  air 
and  water  must  have  been  drawn  away  to  the  other  face  of 
our  satellite  during  the  first  days  of  its  creation." 

"  Pure  fancies !  "  cried  the  unknown. 


212       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

"  No !  Pure  theories !  which  are  based  upon  the  laws  of 
mechanics,  and  it  seems  difficult  to  me  to  refute  them.  I 
appeal  then  to  this  meeting,  and  I  put  it  to  them  whether 
life,  such  as  exists  upon  the  earth,  is  possible  on  the  surface 
of  the  moon?" 

Three  hundred  thousand  auditors  at  once  applauded  the 
proposition.  Ardan's  opponent  tried  to  get  in  another  word, 
but  he  could  not  obtain  a  hearing.  Cries  and  menaces  fell 
upon  him  like  hail. 

"  Enough !  enough ! "  cried  some. 

"  Drive  the  intruder  off !  "  shouted  others. 

"Turn  him  out!"  roared  the  exasperated  crowd. 

But  he,  holding  firmly  on  to  the  platform,  did  not  budge 
an  inch,  and  let  the  storm  pass  on,  which  would  soon  have 
assumed  formidable  proportions,  if  Michel  Ardan  had  not 
quieted  it  by  a  gesture.  He  was  too  chivalrous  to  abandon 
his  opponent  in  an  apparent  extremity. 

"  You  wished  to  say  a  few  more  words?  "  he  asked,  in 
a  pleasant  voice. 

"  Yes,  a  thousand ;  or  rather,  no,  only  one !  If  you  perse- 
vere in  your  enterprise,  you  must  be  a " 

"  Very  rash  person !  How  can  you  treat  me  as  such  ?  me, 
who  have  demanded  a  cylindro-conical  projectile,  in  order 
to  prevent  turning  round  and  round  on  my  way  like  a 
squirrel?" 

"  But,  unhappy  man,  the  dreadful  recoil  will  smash  you 
to  pieces  at  your  starting." 

"My  dear  contradictor,  you  have  just  put  your  finger 
upon  the  true  and  the  only  difficulty;  nevertheless,  I  have 
too  good  an  opinion  of  the  industrial  genius  of  the  Ameri- 
cans not  to  believe  that  they  will  succeed  in  overcoming  it." 

"  But  the  heat  developed  by  the  rapidity  of  the  projectile 
in  crossing  the  strata  of  air?" 

"  Oh !  the  walls  are  thick,  and  I  shall  soon  have  crossed 
the  atmosphere." 

"  But  victuals  and  water?  " 

"I  have  calculated  for  a  twelvemonth's  supply,  and  I 
shall  be  only  four  days  on  the  journey." 

"  But  for  air  to  breathe  on  the  road  ?  " 

"  I  shall  make  it  by  chemical  process." 

"  But  your  fall  on  the  moon,  supposing  you  ever  reach 
it?" 


ATTACK   AND   RIPOSTE  213 

"  It  will  be  six  times  less  dangerous  than  a  sudden  fall 
upon  the  earth,  because  the  weight  will  be  only  one-sixth  as 
great  on  the  surface  of  the  moon." 

"  Still  it  will  be  enough  to  smash  you  like  glass !  " 

"  What  is  to  prevent  my  retarding  the  shock  by  means 
of  rockets  conveniently  placed,  and  lighted  at  the  right  mo- 
ment?" 

"  But  after  all,  supposing  all  difficulties  surmounted,  all 
obstacles  removed,  supposing  everything  combined  to  favor 
you,  and  granting  that  you  may  arrive  safe  and  sound  in  the 
moon,  how  will  you  come  back?  " 

"  I  am  not  coming  back !  " 

At  this  reply,  almost  sublime  in  its  very  simplicity,  the 
assembly  became  silent.  But  its  silence  was  more  eloquent 
than  could  have  been  its  cries  of  enthusiasm.  The  unknown 
profited  by  the  opportunity  and  once  more  protested : 

"  You  will  inevitably  kill  yourself ! "  he  cried;  "  and  your 
death  will  be  that  of  a  madman,  useless  even  to  science !  " 

"  Go  on,  my  dear  unknown,  for  truly  your  prophecies 
are  most  agreeable !  " 

"  It  is  really  too  much ! "  cried  Michel  Ardan's  adversary, 
"  I  do  not  know  why  I  should  continue  so  frivolous  a  dis- 
cussion !  Please  yourself  about  this  insane  expedition !  We 
need  not  trouble  ourselves  about  you!" 

"  Pray  don't  stand  upon  ceremony  S " 

"  No !  another  person  is  responsible  for  your  act." 

"  Who,  may  I  ask?  "  demanded  Michel  Ardan. 

"  The  ignoramus  who  organized  this  equally  absurd  and 
impossible  experiment ! " 

The  attack  was  direct.  Barbicane,  ever  since  the  inter- 
ference of  the  unknown,  had  been  making  fearful  efforts 
of  self-control;  now,  however,  seeing  himself  directly  at- 
tacked, he  could  restrain  himself  no  longer.  He  rose  sud- 
denly, and  was  rushing  upon  the  enemy  who  thus  braved 
him  to  the  face,  when  all  at  once  he  found  himself  separated 
from  him. 

The  platform  was  lifted  by  a  hundred  strong  arms,  and 
the  president  of  the  Gun  Club  shared  with  Michel  Ardan 
triumphal  honors.  The  shield  was  heavy,  but  the  bearers 
came  in  continuous  relays,  disputing,  struggling,  even  fight- 
ing among  themselves  in  their  eagerness  to  lend  their  shoul- 
ders to  this  demonstration. 


214       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

However,  the  unknown  had  not  profited  by  the  tumult  to 
quit  his  post.  Besides,  he  could  not  have  done  it  in  the 
midst  of  that  compact  crowd.  There  he  held  on  in  the  front 
row,  with  crossed  arms,  glaring  at  President  Barbicane  of 
the  Gun  Club. 

The  shouts  of  the  immense  crowd  continued  at  their  high- 
est pitch  throughout  this  triumphant  march.  Michel  Ardan 
took  it  all  with  evident  pleasure.  His  face  gleamed  with  de- 
light. Several  times  the  platform  seemed  seized  with  pitch- 
ing and  rolling  like  a  weather-beaten  ship.  But  the  two 
heroes  of  the  meeting  had  good  sea-legs.  They  never  stum- 
bled; and  their  vessel  arrived  without  dues  at  the  port  of 
Tampa  Town. 

Michel  Ardan  managed  fortunately  to  escape  from  the 
last  embraces  of  his  vigorous  admirers.  He  made  for  the 
Hotel  Franklin,  quickly  gained  his  chamber,  and  slid  under 
the  bed-clothes,  while  an  army  of  a  hundred  thousand  men 
kept  watch  under  his  windows. 

During  this  time,  a  scene,  short,  grave,  and  decisive,  took 
place  between  the  mysterious  personage  and  the  president  of 
the  Gun  Club. 

Barbicane,  free  at  last,  had  gone  straight  at  his  adver- 
sary. 

"  Come !  "  he  said  shortly. 

The  other  followed  him  on  to  the  quay ;  and  the  two  pres- 
ently found  themselves  alone  at  the  entrance  of  an  open 
wharf  on  Jones's  Fall. 

The  two  enemies,  still  mutually  unknown,  gazed  at  each 
other. 

"  Who  are  you?"  asked  Barbicane. 

"  Captain  Nicholl!" 

"  So  I  suspected.  Hitherto  chance  has  never  thrown  you 
in  my  way." 

"  I  am  come  for  that  purpose." 

"  You  have  insulted  me !  " 

"Publicly!" 

"And  you  will  answer  to  me  for  this  insult?  " 

"At  this  very  moment." 

"  No !  I  desire  that  all  that  passes  between  us  shall  be 
secret.  There  is  a  wood  situated  three  miles  from  Tampa, 
the  wood  of  Skersnaw.     Do  you  know  it?  " 

"  I  know  it." 


ATTACK   AND    RIPOSTE  215 

"  Will  you  be  so  good  as  to  enter  it  to-morrow  at  five 
o'clock,  on  one  side?  " 

"Yes!  if  you  will  enter  at  the  other  side  at  the  same 
hour." 

"  And  you  will  not  forget  your  rifle,"  said  Barbicane. 

"  No  more  than  you  will  forget  yours,"  replied  Nicholl. 

These  words  having  been  coldly  spoken,  the  president  of 
the  Gun  Club  and  the  captain  parted.  Barbicane  returned 
to  his  lodging;  but,  instead  of  snatching  a  few  hours  of  re- 
pose, he  passed  the  night  in  endeavoring  to  discover  a 
means  of  evading  the  recoil  of  the  projectile,  and  resolving 
the  difficult  problem  proposed  by  Michel  Ardan  during  the 
discussion  at  the  meeting. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

HOW  A  FRENCHMAN   MANAGES  AN  AFFAIR 

While  the  contract  of  this  duel  was  being  discussed  by 
the  president  and  the  captain — this  dreadful,  savage  duel,  in 
which  each  adversary  became  a  man-hunter — Michel  Ardan 
was  resting  from  the  fatigues  of  his  triumph.  Resting 
is  hardly  an  appropriate  expression,  for  American  beds  rival 
marble  or  granite  tables  for  hardness. 

Arden  was  sleeping,  then,  badly  enough,  tossing  about 
between  the  cloths  which  served  him  for  sheets,  and  he  was 
dreaming  of  making  a  more  comfortable  couch  in  his  pro- 
jectile when  a  frightful  noise  disturbed  his  dreams.  Thun- 
dering blows  shook  his  door.  They  seemed  to  be  caused  by 
some  iron  instrument.  A  great  deal  of  loud  talking  was 
distinguishable  in  this  racket,  which  was  rather  too  early  in 
the  morning.  "  Open  the  door,"  someone  shrieked,  "  for 
Heaven's  sake !  "  Ardan  saw  no  reason  for  complying  with 
a  demand  so  roughly  expressed.  However,  he  got  up  and 
opened  the  door  just  as  it  was  giving  way  before  the  blows 
of  this  determined  visitor.  The  secretary  of  the  Gun  Club 
burst  into  the  room.  A  bomb  could  not  have  made  more 
noise  or  have  entered  the  room  with  less  ceremony. 

"  Last  night,"  cried  J.  T.  Maston,  ex  abrnpto,  "  our  presi- 
dent was  publicly  insulted  during  the  meeting.  He  pro- 
voked his  adversary,  who  is  none  other  than  Captain 
Nicholl!     They  are  fighting  this  morning  in  the  wood  of 


216       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

Skersnaw.  I  heard  all  particulars  from  the  mouth  of  Barbi- 
cane  himself.  If  he  is  killed,  then  our  scheme  is  at  an  end. 
We  must  prevent  this  duel ;  and  one  man  alone  has  enough 
influence  over  Barbicane  to  stop  him,  and  that  man  is 
Michel  Ardan." 

While  J.  T.  Maston  was  speaking,  Michel  Ardan,  without 
interrupting  him,  had  hastily  put  on  his  clothes;  and,  in 
less  than  two  minutes,  the  two  friends  were  making  for 
the  suburbs  of  Tampa  Town  with  rapid  strides. 

It  was  during  this  walk  that  Maston  told  Ardan  the  state 
of  the  case.  He  told  him  the  real  causes  of  the  hostility  be- 
tween Barbicane  and  Nicholl;  how  it  was  of  old  date,  and 
why,  thanks  to  unknown  friends,  the  president  and  the  cap- 
tain had,  as  yet,  never  met  face  to  face.  He  added  that  it 
arose  simply  from  a  rivalry  between  iron  plates  and  shot, 
and,  finally,  that  the  scene  at  the  meeting  was  only  the  long- 
wished-for  opportunity  for  Nicholl  to  pay  off  an  old  grudge. 

Nothing  is  more  dreadful  than  private  duels  in  America. 
The  two  adversaries  attack  each  other  like  wild  beasts. 
Then  it  is  that  they  might  well  covet  those  wonderful  prop- 
erties of  the  Indians  of  the  prairies — their  quick  intelligence, 
their  ingenious  cunning,  their  scent  of  the  enemy.  A  single 
mistake,  a  moment's  hesitation,  a  single  false  step  may  cause 
death.  On  these  occasions  Yankees  are  often  accompanied 
by  their  dogs,  and  keep  up  the  struggle  for  hours. 

"  What  demons  you  are !  "  cried  Michel  Ardan,  when  his 
companion  had  depicted  this  scene  to  him  with  much  energy. 

"  Yes,  we  are,"  replied  J.  T.,  modestly :  "  but  we  had  bet- 
ter make  haste." 

Though  Michel  Ardan  and  he  had  crossed  the  plain  still 
wet  with  dew,  and  had  taken  the  shortest  route  over  creeks 
and  rice-fields,  they  could  not  reach  Skersnaw  under  five 
hours  and  a  half. 

Barbicane  must  have  passed  the  border  half  an  hour  ago. 

There  was  an  old  bushman  working  there,  occupied  in 
selling  faggots  from  trees  that  had  been  leveled  by  his  ax. 

Maston  ran  towards  him,  saying,  "  Have  you  seen  a  man 
go  into  the  wood  armed  with  a  rifle?  Barbicane,  the  presi- 
dent, my  best  friend?" 

The  worthy  secretary  of  the  Gun  Club  thought  that  his 
president  must  be  known  by  all  the  world.  But  the  bushman 
did  not  seem  to  understand  him. 


HOW   A   FRENCHMAN    MANAGES        217 

"  A  hunter?  "  said  Ardan. 

"  A  hunter  ?    Yes,"  replied  the  bushman. 

"  Long  ago  ?  " 

"  About  an  hour." 

"  Too  late!  "  cried  Maston. 

"  Have  you  heard  any  gun-shots  ? "  asked  Ardan. 

"No!" 

"  Not  one  ?  " 

"  Not  one !  that  hunter  did  not  look  as  if  he  knew  how  to 
hunt!" 

"  What  is  to  be  done  ?  "  said  Maston. 

"  We  must  go  into  the  wood,  at  the  risk  of  getting  a  ball 
which  is  not  intended  for  us." 

"  Ah! "  cried  Maston,  in  a  tone  which  could  not  be  mis- 
taken, "  I  would  rather  have  twenty  balls  in  my  own  head 
than  one  in  Barbicane's." 

"  Forward,  then,"  said  Ardan,  pressing  his  companion's 
hand." 

A  few  moments  later  the  two  friends  had  disappeared  in 
the  copse.  It  was  a  dense  thicket,  in  which  rose  huge  cy- 
presses, sycamores,  tulip-trees,  olives,  tamarinds,  oaks  and 
magnolias.  These  different  trees  had  interwoven  their 
branches  into  an  inextricable  maze,  through  which  the  eye 
could  not  penetrate.  Michel  Ardan  and  Maston  walked  side 
by  side  in  silence  through  the  tall  grass,  cutting  themselves 
a  path  through  the  strong  creepers,  casting  curious  glances 
on  the  bushes,  and  momentarily  expecting  to  hear  the  sound 
of  rifles.  As  for  the  traces  which  Barbicane  ought  to  have 
left  of  his  passage  through  the  wood,  there  was  not  a  ves- 
tige of  them  visible;  so  they  followed  the  barely  perceptible 
paths  along  which  Indians  had  tracked  some  enemy,  and 
which  the  dense  foliage  darkly  overshadowed. 

After  an  hour  spent  in  vain  pursuit  the  two  stopped,  in 
intensified  anxiety. 

"  It  must  be  all  over,"  said  Maston,  discouraged.  "  A 
man  like  Barbicane  would  not  dodge  with  his  enemy,  or 
ensnare  him,  would  not  even  maneuver!  He  is  too  open, 
too  brave.  He  has  gone  straight  ahead,  right  into  the  dan- 
ger, and  doubtless  far  enough  from  the  bushman  for  the 
wind  to  prevent  his  hearing  the  report  of  the  rifles." 

"  But  surely,"  replied  Michel  Ardan,  "  since  we  entered 
the  wood  we  should  have  h^ard ! " 


2i8       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

"  And  what  if  we  came  too  late?  "  cried  Maston  in  tones 
of  despair. 

For  once  Ardan  had  no  reply  to  make,  he  and  Maston 
resuming  their  walk  in  silence.  From  time  to  time,  indeed, 
they  raised  great  shouts,  calling  alternately  Barbicane  and 
Nicholl,  neither  of  whom,  however,  answered  their  cries. 
Only  the  birds,  awakened  by  the  sound,  flew  past  them  and 
disappeared  among  the  branches,  while  some  frightened  deer 
fled  precipitately  before  them. 

For  another  hour  their  search  was  continued.  The 
greater  part  of  the  wood  had  been  explored.  There  was 
nothing  to  reveal  the  presence  of  the  combatants.  The  in- 
formation of  the  bushman  was  after  all  doubtful,  and  Ardan 
was  about  to  propose  their  abandoning  this  useless  pursuit, 
when  all  at  once  Maston  stopped. 

"Hush!  "  said  he,  "  there  is  someone  down  there  1  " 

"  Someone  ?  "  repeated  Michel  Ardan. 

"Yes;  a  man!  He  seems  motionless.  His  rifle  is  not 
in  his  hands.    What  can  he  be  doing?  " 

"But  can  you  recognize  him?"  asked  Ardan,  whose 
short  sight  was  of  little  use  to  him  in  such  circumstances. 

"  Yes !  yes !  He  is  turning  towards  us,"  answered  Mas- 
ton. 

"And  it  is?" 

"  Captain  Nicholl !  " 

"  Nicholl  ?  "  cried  Michel  Ardan,  feeling  a  terrible  pang 
of  grief. 

"  Nicholl  unarmed !  He  has,  then,  no  longer  any  fear  of 
his  adversary !  " 

"  Let  us  go  to  him,"  said  Michel  Ardan,  "  and  find  out 
the  truth." 

But  he  and  his  companion  had  barely  taken  fifty  steps, 
when  they  paused  to  examine  the  captain  more  attentively. 
They  expected  to  find  a  bloodthirsty  man,  happy  in  his  re- 
venge. 

On  seeing  him,  they  remained  stupefied. 

A  net,  composed  of  very  fine  meshes,  hung  between  two 
enormous  tulip-trees,  and  in  the  midst  of  this  snare,  with 
its  wings  entangled,  was  a  poor  little  bird,  uttering  pitiful 
cries,  while  it  vainly  struggled  to  escape.  The  bird-catcher 
who  had  laid  this  snare  was  no  human  being,  but  a  venom- 
ous spider,  peculiar  to  that  country,  as  large  as  a  pigeon's 


HOW   A   FRENCHMAN    MANAGES        219 

egg,  and  armed  with  enormous  claws.  The  hideous  crea- 
ture, instead  of  rushing  on  its  prey,  had  beaten  a  sudden  re- 
treat and  taken  refuge  in  the  upper  branches  of  the  tulip- 
tree,  for  a  formidable  enemy  menaced  its  stronghold. 

Here,  then,  was  Nicholl,  his  gun  on  the  ground,  forgetful 
of  danger,  trying  if  possible  to  save  the  victim  from  its 
cobweb  prison.  At  last  it  was  accomplished,  and  the  little 
bird  flew  joyfully  away  and  disappeared. 

Nicholl  lovingly  watched  its  flight,  when  he  heard  these 
words  pronounced  by  a  voice  full  of  emotion : 

"You  are  indeed  a  brave  man!" 

He  turned.  Michel  Ardan  was  before  him,  repeating 
in  a  different  tone : 

"  And  a  kind-hearted  one !  " 

"  Michel  Ardan ! "  cried  the  captain.  "  Why  are  you 
here?" 

"  To  press  your  hand,  Nicholl,  and  to  prevent  you  from 
either  killing  Barbicane  or  being  killed  by  him." 

"  Barbicane !  "  returned  the  captain.  "  I  have  been  look- 
ing for  him  for  the  last  two  hours  in  vain.  Where  is  he 
hiding?" 

"  Nicholl !  "  said  Michel  Ardan,  "  this  is  not  courteous ! 
we  ought  always  to  treat  an  adversary  with  respect;  rest 
assured  if  Barbicane  is  still  alive  we  shall  find  him  all  the 
more  easily;  because  if  he  has  not,  like  you,  been  amusing 
himself  with  freeing  oppressed  birds,  he  must  be  looking  for 
you.  When  we  have  found  him,  Michel  Ardan  tells  you 
this  there  will  be  no  duel  between  you." 

"  Between  President  Barbicane  and  myself,"  gravely  re- 
plied Nicholl,  "  there  is  a  rivalry  which  the  death  of  one  of 
us " 

"  Pooh,  pooh!"  said  Ardan.  "  Brave  fellows  like  you  in- 
deed !  you  shall  not  fight !  " 

"  I  will  fight,  sir !  " 

"No!" 

"  Captain,"  said  J.  T.  Maston,  with  much  feeling,  "  I  am 
a  friend  of  the  president's,  his  alter  ego,  his  second  self; 
if  you  really  must  kill  someone,  shoot  me!  it  will  do  just  as 
well!'; 

"  Sir,"  Nicholl  replied,  seizing  his  rifle  convulsively, 
"  these  jokes " 

"  Our  friend  Maston  is  not  joking,"  replied  Ardan.    "  I 


220       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

fully  understand  his  idea  of  being  killed  himself  in  order 
to  save  his  friend.  But  neither  he  nor  Barbicane  will  fall 
before  the  balls  of  Captain  Nicholl.  Indeed  I  have  so  at- 
tractive a  proposal  to  make  to  the  two  rivals,  that  both  will 
be  eager  to  accept  it." 

"  What  is  it?  "  asked  Nicholl  with  manifest  incredulity. 

"  Patience !  "  exclaimed  Ardan.  "  I  can  only  reveal  it 
in  the  presence  of  Barbicane." 

"  Let  us  go  in  search  of  him  then  ?  "  cried  the  captain. 

The  three  men  started  off  at  once ;  the  captain  having  dis- 
charged his  rifle,  threw  it  over  his  shoulder,and  advanced  in 
silence. 

Another  half-hour  passed,  and  the  pursuit  was  still  fruit- 
less. Maston  was  oppressed  with  sinister  forebodings.  He 
looked  fiercely  at  Nicholl,  asking  himself  whether  the  cap- 
tain's vengeance  had  been  already  satisfied,  and  the  unfor- 
tunate Barbicane,  shot,  was  perhaps  lying  dead  on  some 
bloody  track.  The  same  thought  seemed  to  occur  to  Ardan ; 
and  both  were  casting  inquiring  glances  on  Nicholl,  when 
suddenly  Maston  paused. 

The  motionless  figure  of  a  man  leaning  against  a  gigantic 
catalpa  twenty  feet  off  appeared,  half-veiled  by  the  foliage. 

"  It  is  he !  "  said  Maston. 

Barbicane  never  moved.  Ardan  looked  at  the  captain, 
but  he  did  not  wince.    Ardan  went  forward  crying: 

"  Barbicane,  Barbicane !  " 

No  answer !  Ardan  rushed  towards  his  friend ;  but  in  the 
act  of  seizing  his  arms,  he  stopped  short  and  uttered  a  cry 
of  surprise. 

Barbicane,  pencil  in  hand,  was  tracing  geometrical  figures 
in  a  memorandum  book,  whilst  his  unloaded  rifle  lay  beside 
him  on  the  ground. 

Absorbed  in  his  studies,  Barbicane,  in  his  turn  forgetful 
of  the  duel,  had  seen  and  heard  nothing. 

When  Ardan  took  his  hand,  he  looked  up  and  stared  at 
his  visitor  in  astonishment. 

"Ah,  it  is  you!"  he  cried  at  last.    "I  have  found  it." 

"What?" 

"  My  plan !  " 

"What  plan?" 

"  The  plan  for  counteracting  the  effect  of  the  shock  at  the 
departure  of  the  projectile !  " 


HOW   A   FRENCHMAN    MANAGES        221 

"  Indeed  ?  "  said  Michel  Ardan,  looking  at  the  captain  out 
of  the  corner  of  his  eye. 

"  Yes !  water !  simply  water,  which  will  act  as  a  spring — ■ 
ah!  Maston,"  cried  Barbicane,  "  you  here  also?" 

"  Himself,"  replied  Ardan;  "  and  permit  me  to  introduce 
to  you  at  the  same  time  the  worthy  Captain  Nicholl !  " 

"Captain  Nicholl!"  cried  Barbicane,  who  jumped  up  at 
once,  "  Pardon  me,  captain,  I  had  quite  forgotten — I  am 
ready!" 

Michel  Ardan  interfered,  without  giving  the  two  enemies 
time  to  say  anything  more.. 

"Thank  Heaven!"  said  he.  "It  is  a  happy  thing  that 
brave  men  like  you  two  did  not  meet  sooner!  we  should 
now  have  been  mourning  for  one  or  other  of  you.  But, 
thanks  to  Providence,  which  has  interfered,  there  is  now 
no  further  cause  for  alarm.  When  one  forgets  one's  anger 
in  mechanics  or  in  cobwebs,  it  is  a  sign  that  the  anger  is  not 
dangerous." 

Michel  Ardan  then  told  the  president  how  the  captain  had 
been  found  occupied. 

"  I  put  it  to  you  now,"  said  he  in  conclusion,  "  are  two 
such  good  fellows  as  you  are  made  on  purpose  to  smash 
each  other's  skulls  with  shot?  " 

There  was  in  "  the  situation  "  somewhat  of  the  ridiculous, 
something  quite  unexpected;  Michel  Ardan  saw  this,  and 
determined  to  effect  a  reconciliation. 

"  My  good  friends,"  said  he,  with  his  most  bewitching 
smile,  "  this  is  nothing  but  a  misunderstanding.  Nothing 
more !  well !  to  prove  that  it  is  all  over  between  you,  accept 
frankly  the  proposal  I  am  going  to  make  to  you." 

"  M'ake  it,"  said  Nicholl. 

"Our  friend  Barbicane  believes  that  his  projectile  will 
go  straight  to  the  moon?  " 

"  Yes,  certainly,"  replied  the  president. 

"And  our  friend  Nicholl  is  persuaded  it  will  fall  back 
upon  the  earth  ?  " 

"  I  am  certain  of  it,"  cried  the  captain. 

"  Good !  "  said  Ardan.  "  I  can  not  pretend  to  make  you 
agree ;  but  I  suggest  this : — Go  with  me,  and  so  see  whether 
we  are  stopped  on  our  journey." 

"  What?"  exclaimed  J.  T.  Maston,  stupefied. 

The  two  rivals,  on  this  sudden  proposal,  looked  steadily 


222       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

attach  other.  Barbicane  waited  for  the  captain's  answer. 
Nicholl  watched  for  the  decision  of  the  president. 

"Well?"  said  Michel.  "There  is  now  no  fear  of  the 
shock!" 

"  Done !  "  cried  Barbicane. 

But  quickly  as  he  pronounced  the  word,  he  was  not  before 
Nicholl. 

"  Hurrah !  bravo !  hip !  hip !  hurrah ! "  cried  Michel,  giving 
a  hand  to  each  of  the  late  adversaries.  "  Now  that  it  is  all 
settled,  my  friends,  allow  me  to  treat  you  after  French 
fashion.    Let  us  be  off  to  breakfast ! " 


CHAPTER  XXII 

THE  NEW  CITIZEN  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES 

That  same  day  all  America  heard  of  the  affair  of  Cap- 
tain Nicholl  and  President  Barbicane,  as  well  as  its  singular 
denouement.  From  that  day  forth,  Michel  Ardan  had  not 
one  moment's  rest.  Deputations  from  all  corners  of  the 
Union  harassed  him  without  cessation  or  intermission.  He 
was  compelled  to  receive  them  all,  whether  he  would  or  no. 
How  many  hands  he  shook,  how  many  people  he  was  "  hail- 
fellow-well-met "  with,  it  is  impossible  to  guess!  Such  a 
triumphal  result  would  have  intoxicated  any  other  man; 
but  he  managed  to  keep  himself  in  a  state  of  delightful 
.yemi-tipsiness. 

Among  the  deputations  of  all  kinds  which  assailed  him, 
that  of  "  The  Lunatics "  were  careful  not  to  forget  what 
they  owed  to  the  future  conqueror  of  the  moon.  One  day, 
certain  of  these  poor  people,  so  numerous  in  America,  came 
to  call  upon  him,  and  requested  permission  to  return  with 
him  to  their  native  country. 

"  Singular  hallucination ! "  said  he  to  Barbicane,  after 
having  dismissed  the  deputation  with  promises  to  convey 
numbers  of  messages  to  friends  in  the  moon.  "  Do  you 
believe  in  the  influence  of  the  moon  upon  distempers  ?  " 

"Scarcely!" 

"  No  more  do  I,  despite  some  remarkable  recorded  facts 
of  history.  For  instance,  during  an  epidemic  in  1693,  a 
large  number  of  persons  died  at  the  very  moment  of  an 
eclipse.     The  celebrated  Bacon  always  fainted  during  an 


THE  NEW  CITIZEN  223 

eclipse.  Charles  VI.  relapsed  six  times  into  madness  during 
the  year  1399,  sometimes  during  the  new,  sometimes  during 
the  full  moon.  Gall  observed  that  insane  persons  under- 
went an  accession  of  their  disorder  twice  in  every  month, 
at  the  epochs  of  new  and  full  moon.  In  fact,  numerous 
observations  made  upon  fevers,  somnambulisms,  and  other 
human  maladies,  seem  to  prove  that  the  moon  does  exercise 
some  mysterious  influence  upon  man." 

"  But  the  how  and  the  wherefore  ?  "  asked  Barbicane. 

"  Well,  I  can  only  give  you  the  answer  which  Arago  bor- 
rowed from  Plutarch,  which  is  nineteen  centuries  old.  '  Per- 
haps the  stories  are  not  true ! '  " 

In  the  height  of  his  triumph,  Michel  Ardan  had  to  en- 
counter all  the  annoyances  incidental  to  a  man  of  celebrity. 
Managers  of  entertainments  wanted  to  exhibit  him.  Bar- 
num  offered  him  a  million  dollars  to  make  the  tour  of  the 
United  States  in  his  show.  As  for  his  photographs,  they 
were  sold  of  all  sizes,  and  his  portrait  taken  in  every  imagin- 
able posture.  More  than  half  a  million  copies  were  disposed 
of  in  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time. 

But  it  was  not  only  the  men  who  paid  him  homage,  but 
the  women  also.  He  might  have  married  well  a  hundred 
times  over,  if  he  had  been  willing  to  settle  in  life.  The  old 
maids,  in  particular,  of  forty  years  and  upwards,  devoured 
his  photographs  day  and  night.  They  would  have  married 
him  by  hundreds,  even  if  he  had  imposed  upon  them  the 
condition  of  accompanying  him  into  space.  He  had,  how- 
ever, no  intention  of  transplanting  a  race  of  Franco-Ameri- 
cans upon  the  surface  of  the  moon. 

He  therefore  declined  all  offers. 

As  soon  as  he  could  withdraw  from  these  somewhat  em- 
barrassing demonstrations,  he  went,  accompanied  by  his 
friends,  to  pay  a  visit  to  the  Columbiad.  He  was  highly 
gratified  by  his  inspection,  and  made  the  descent  to  the 
bottom  of  the  tube  of  this  gigantic  machine  which  was 
presently  to  launch  him  to  the  regions  of  the  moon. 

It  is  necessary  here  to  mention  a  proposal  of  J.  T.  Mas- 
ton's.  When  the  secretary  of  the  Gun  Club  found  that 
Barbicane  and  Nicholl  accepted  the  proposal  of  Michel 
Ardan,  he  determined  to  join  them,  and  make  one  of  a  snug 
party  of  four.  So  one  day  he  determined  to  be  admitted  as 
one  of  the  travelers.     Barbicane,  pained  at  having  to  refuse 


224       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

him,  gave  him  clearly  to  understand  that  the  projectile  could 
not  possibly  contain  so  many  passengers.  Maston,  in  de- 
spair, went  in  seach  of  Michel  Ardan,  who  counseled  him 
to  resign  himself  to  the  situation,  adding  one  or  two  argu- 
ments ad  hominem. 

"  You  see,  old  fellow,"  he  said,  "  you  must  not  take 
what  I  say  in  bad  part;  but  really,  between  ourselves,  you 
are  in  too  incomplete  a  condition  to  appear  in  the  moon ! " 

"  Incomplete  ?  "  shrieked  the  valiant  invalid. 

"  Yes,  my  dear  fellow !  imagine  our  meeting  some  of  the 
inhabitants  up  there !  Would  you  like  to  give  them  such  a 
melancholy  notion  of  what  goes  on  down  here?  to  teach 
them  what  war  is,  to  inform  them  that  we  employ  our  time 
chiefly  in  devouring  each  other,  in  smashing  arms  and  legs, 
and  that  too  on  a  globe  which  is  capable  of  supporting  a 
hundred  billions  of  inhabitants,  and  which  actually  does  con- 
tain nearly  two  hundred  millions  ?  Why,  my  worthy  friend, 
we  should  have  to  turn  you  out  of  doors !  " 

"  But  still,  if  you  arrive  there  in  pieces,  you  will  be  as 
incomplete  as  I  am." 

"  Unquestionably,"  replied  Michel  Ardan ;  "  but  we  shall 
not." 

In  fact,  a  preparatory  experiment,  tried  on  the  18th  Oc- 
tober, had  yielded  the  best  results  and  caused  the  most  well- 
grounded  hopes  of  success.  Barbicane,  desirous  of  obtaining 
some  notion  of  the  effect  of  the  shock  at  the  moment  of 
the  projectile's  departure,  had  procured  a  38-inch  mortar 
from  the  arsenal  of  Pensacola.  He  had  this  placed  on  the 
bank  of  Hillisborough  Roads,  in  order  that  the  shell  might 
fall  back  into  the  sea,  and  the  shock  be  thereby  destroyed. 
His  object  was  to  ascertain  the  extent  of  the  shock  of  de- 
parture, and  not  that  of  the  return. 

A  hollow  projectile  had  been  prepared  for  this  curious 
experiment.  A  thick  padding  fastened  upon  a  kind  of 
elastic  network,  made  of  the  best  steel,  lined  the  inside  of 
the  walls.    It  was  a  veritable  nest  most  carefully  wadded. 

"  What  a  pity  I  can't  find  room  in  there,"  said  J.  T. 
Maston,  regretting  that  his  height  did  not  allow  of  his  try- 
ing the  adventure. 

Within  this  shell  were  shut  up  a  large  cat,  and  a  squirrel 
belonging  to  J.  T.  Maston,  and  of  which  he  was  particularly 
fond.    They  were  desirous,  however,  of  ascertaining  how; 


THE  NEW  CITIZEN  -225 

this  little  animal,  least  of  all  others  subject  to  giddiness, 
would  endure  this  experimental  voyage. 

The  mortar  was  charged  with  160  lbs.  of  powder,  and  the 
shell  placed  in  the  chamber.  On  being  fired,  the  projectile 
rose  with  great  velocity,  described  a  majestic  parabola,  at- 
tained a  height  of  about  a  thousand  feet,  and  with  a  graceful 
curve  descended  in  the  midst  of  the  vessels  that  lay  there 
at  anchor. 

Without  a  moment's  loss  of  time  a  small  boat  put  off 
in  the  direction  of  its  fall;  some  active  divers  plunged  into 
the  water  and  attached  ropes  to  the  handles  of  the  shell, 
which  was  quickly  dragged  on  board.  Five  minutes  did 
not  elapse  between  the  moment  of  enclosing  the  animals 
and  that  of  unscrewing  the  coverlid  of  their  prison. 

Ardan,  Barbicane,  Maston,  and  Nicholl  were  present  on 
board  the  boat,  and  assisted  at  the  operation  with  an  inter- 
est which  may  readily  be  comprehended.  Hardly  had  the 
shell  been  opened  when  the  cat  leaped  out,  slightly  bruised, 
but  full  of  life,  and  exhibiting  no  signs  whatever  of  having 
made  an  aerial  expedition.  No  trace,  however,  of  the  squir- 
rel could  be  discovered.  The  truth  at  last  became  apparent ; 
the  cat  had  eaten  its  fellow-traveler ! 

J.  T.  Maston  grieved  much  for  the  loss  of  his  poor 
squirrel,  and  proposed  to  add  its  case  to  that  of  other  mar- 
tyrs to  science. 

After  this  experiment  all  hesitation,  all  fear  disappeared. 
Besides,  Barbicane's  plans  would  ensure  greater  perfection 
for  his  projectile,  and  go  far  to  annihilate  altogether  the 
effects  of  the  shock.    Nothing  now  remained  but  to  go ! 

Two  days  later  Michel  Ardan  received  a  message  from 
the  President  of  the  United  States,  an  honor  of  which  he 
showed  himself  especially  sensible. 

After  the  example  of  his  illustrious  fellow-countryman, 
the  Marquis  de  la  Fayette,  the  Government  had  decreed  to 
him  the  title  of  "  Citizen  of  the  United  States  of  America." 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

THE  PROJECTILE  VEHICLE 

On  the  completion  of  the  Columbiad  the  public  interest 
centered  in  the  projectile  itself,  the  vehicle  which  was  des- 
tined to  carry  the  three  hardy  adventurers  into  space. 

The  new  plans  had  been  sent  to  Breadwill  &  Co.,  of 
Albany,  with  the  request  for  their  speedy  execution.  The 
projectile  was  consequently  cast  on  the  2d  November,  and 
immediately  forwarded  by  the  Eastern  Railway  to  Stones 
Hill,  which  it  reached  without  accident  on  the  ioth  of  that 
month,  where  Michel  Ardan,  Barbicane,  and  Nicholl  were 
waiting  impatiently  for  it. 

The  projectile  had  now  to  be  filled  to  the  depth  of  three 
feet  with  a  bed  of  water,  intended  to  support  a  water-tight 
wooden  disc,  which  worked  easily  within  the  walls  of  the 
projectile.  It  was  upon  this  kind  of  raft  that  the  travelers 
were  to  take  their  place.  This  body  of  water  was  divided  by 
horizontal  partitions,  which  the  shock  of  the  departure 
would  have  to  break  in  succession.  Then  each  sheet  of 
water,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  running  off  into  escape 
tubes  towards  the  top  of  the  projectile,  constituted  a  kind  of 
spring ;  and  the  wooden  disc,  supplied  with  extremely  power- 
ful plugs,  could  not  strike  the  lowest  plate  except  after 
breaking  successively  the  different  partitions.  Undoubtedly 
the  travelers  would  still  have  to  encounter  a  violent  recoil 
after  the  complete  escapement  of  the  water;  but  the  first 
shock  would  be  almost  entirely  destroyed  by  this  powerful 
spring.  The  upper  part  of  the  walls  were  lined  with  a  thick 
padding  of  leather,  fastened  upon  springs  of  the  best  steel, 
behind  which  the  escape  tubes  were  completely  concealed; 
thus  all  imaginable  precautions  had  been  taken  for  averting 
the  first  shock;  and  if  they  did  get  crushed,  they  must,  as 
Michel  Ardan  said,  be  made  of  very  bad  materials. 

The  entrance  into  this  metallic  tower  was  by  a  narrow 
aperture  contrived  in  the  wall  of  the  cone.  This  was  her- 
metically closed  by  a  plate  of  aluminium,  fastened  internally 
by  powerful  screw-pressure.  The  travelers  could  therefore 
quit  their  prison  at  pleasure,  as  soon  as  they  should  reach 
the  moon. 

Light  and  view  were  given  by  means  of  four  thick  lenticu- 
lar glass  scuttles,  two  pierced  in  the  circular  wall  itself, 
the  third  in  the  bottom,  the  fourth   in  the  top.    These  scut- 

226 


THE  PROJECTILE  VEHICLE  227 

ties  then  were  protected  against  the  shock  of  departure  by- 
plates  let  into  solid  grooves,  which  could  easily  be  opened 
outwards  by  unscrewing  them  from  the  inside.  Reservoirs 
firmly  fixed  contained  water  and  the  necessary  provisions ; 
and  fire  and  light  were  procurable  by  means  of  gas,  con- 
tained in  a  special  reservoir  under  a  pressure  of  several 
atmospheres.  They  had  only  to  turn  a  tap,  and  for  six 
hours  gas  would  light  as  well  as  warm  this  comfortable 
vehicle. 

There  now  remained  only  the  question  of  air,  for,  allow- 
ing for  the  consumption  of  air  by  Barbicane,  his  two  com- 
panions, and  two  dogs,  which  he  purposed  taking  with  him, 
it  was  necessary  to  renew  the  air  of  the  projectile.  Now 
air  consists  principally  of  twenty-one  parts  of  oxygen  and 
seventy-nine  of  nitrogen.  The  lungs  absorb  the  oxygen, 
which  is  indispensable  for  the  support  of  life,  and  reject 
the  nitrogen.  The  air  expired  loses  nearly  five  per  cent,  of 
the  former  and  contains  nearly  an  equal  volume  of  car- 
bonic acid,  produced  by  the  combustion  of  the  elements  of 
the  blood.  In  an  air-tight  enclosure,  then,  after  a  certain 
time  all  the  oxygen  of  the  air  will  be  replaced  by  the  carbonic 
acid — a  gas  fatal  to  life.  There  were  two  things  to  be  done 
then — first  to  replace  the  absorbed  oxygen;  secondly  to  de- 
stroy the  expired  carbonic  acid ;  both  easy  enough  to  do,  by 
means  of  chlorate  of  potass  and  caustic  potash.  The  former 
is  a  salt  which  appears  under  the  form  of  white  crystals; 
when  raised  to  a  temperature  of  4000  it  is  transformed  into 
chlorure  of  potassium  and  the  oxygen  which  it  contains  is 
entirely  liberated.  Now  twenty-eight  pounds  of  chlorate 
of  potass  produce  seven  pounds  of  oxygen,  or  2,400  litres — « 
the  quantity  necessary  for  the  travelers  during  twenty- four 
hours. 

Caustic  potash  has  a  great  affinity  for  carbonic  acid; 
and  it  is  sufficient  to  shake  it  in  order  for  it  to  seize  upon 
the  acid  and  form  bi-carbonate  of  potass.  By  these  two 
means  they  would  be  enabled  to  restore  to  the  vitiated  air  its 
life-supporting  properties. 

It  is  necessary,  however,  to  add  that  the  experiments 
had  hitherto  been  made  in  anima  vili.  Whatever  its  scien- 
tific accuracy  was,  they  were  at  present  ignorant  how  it 
would  answer  with  human  beings.  The  honor  of  putting 
it  to  the  proof  was  energetically  claimed  by  J.  T.  Maston. 


228       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

"  Since  I  am  not  to  go,"  said  the  brave  artillerist,  "  I  may 
at  least  live  for  a  week  in  the  projectile." 

It  would  have  been  hard  to  refuse  him;  so  they  consented 
to  his  wish.  A  sufficient  quantity  of  chlorate  of  potass  and 
of  caustic  potash  was  placed  at  his  disposal,  together  with 
provisions  for  eight  days.  And  having  shaken  hands  with 
his  friends,  on  the  12th  November,  at  six  o'clock  a.m., 
after  strictly  informing  them  not  to  open  his  prison  before 
the  20th,  at  six  o'clock  p.m.,  he  slid  down  the  projectile,  the 
plate  of  which  was  at  once  hermetically  sealed.  What  djd 
he  do  with  himself  during  that  week?  They  could  get  no 
information.  The  thickness  of  the  walls  of  the  projectile 
prevented  any  sound  reaching  from  the  inside  to  the  out- 
side. 

On  the  20th  of  November,  at  six  p.m.,  exactly,  the  plate  was 
opened.  The  friends  of  J.  T.  Maston  had  been  all  along  in 
a  state  of  much  anxiety;  but  they  were  promptly  re-assured 
on  hearing  a  jolly  voice  shouting  a  boisterous  hurrah  to 
them. 

Presently  afterwards  the  secretary  of  the  Gun  Club 
appeared  at  the  top  of  the  cone  in  a  triumphant  attitude. 
He  had  grown  fat ! 


CHAPTER   XXIV 

THE  TELESCOPE  OF  THE  ROCKY  MOUNTAINS 

On  the  20th  of  October  in  the  preceding  year,  after  the 
close  of  the  subscription,  the  president  of  the  Gun  Club  had 
credited  the  Observatory  of  Cambridge  with  the  necessary 
sum  for  the  construction  of  a  gigantic  optical  instrument. 
This  instrument  was  designed  for  the  purpose  of  rendering 
visible  on  the  surface  of  the  moon  any  object  exceeding  nine 
feet  in  diameter. 

At  the  period  when  the  Gun  Club  essayed  their  great  ex- 
periment, such  instruments  had  reached  a  high  degree  of 
perfection,  and  produced  some  magnificent  results.  Two 
telescopes  in  particular,  at  this  time,  were  possessed  of  re- 
markable power  and  of  gigantic  dimensions.  The  first, 
constructed  by  Herschel,  was  thirty-six  feet  in  length,  and 
had  an  object-glass  of  four  feet  six  inches;  it  possessed  a 
magnifying  power  of  6,000.    The  second  was  raised  in 


THE  TELESCOPE  OF  THE  ROCKYS       229 

Ireland,  in  Parsonstown  Park,  and  belongs  to  Lord  Rosse. 
The  length  of  this  tube  is  forty-eight  feet,  and  the  diameter 
of  its  object-glass  six  feet;  it  magnifies  6,400  times,  and  re- 
quired an  immense  erection  of  brickwork  and  masonry  for 
the  purpose  of  working  it,  its  weight  being  twelve  tons  and 
a  half. 

Still,  despite  these  colossal  dimensions,  the  actual  en- 
largements scarcely  exceeded  6,000  times  in  round  numbers ; 
consequently,  the  moon  was  brought  within  no  nearer  an 
apparent  distance  than  thirty-nine  miles;  and  objects  .of 
less  than  sixty  feet  in  diameter,  unless  they  were  of  very 
considerable  length,  were  still  imperceptible. 

In  the  present  case,  dealing  with  a  projectile  nine  feet 
in  diameter  and  fifteen  feet  long,  it  became  necessary  to 
bring  the  moon  within  an  apparent  distance  of  five  miles 
at  most;  and,  for  that  purpose,  to  establish  a  magnifying 
power  of  48,000  times. 

Such  was  the  question  proposed  to  the  Observatory  of 
Cambridge.  There  was  no  lack  of  funds;  the  difficulty 
was  purely  one  of  construction. 

After  considerable  discussion  as  to  the  best  form  and 
principle  of  the  proposed  instrument  the  work  was  finally 
commenced.  According  to  the  calculations  of  the  Obser- 
vatory of  Cambridge,  the  tube  of  the  new  reflector  would 
require  to  be  280  feet  in  length,  and  the  object-glass  six- 
teen feet  in  diameter.  Colossal  as  these  dimensions  may 
appear,  they  were  diminutive  in  comparison  with  the 
10,000  foot  telescope  proposed  by  the  astronomer  Hooke 
only  a  few  years  ago!  Regarding  the  choice  of  locality, 
that  matter  was  promptly  determined  in  favor  of  Long's 
Peak,  in  Missouri. 

Neither  pen  nor  language  can  describe  the  difficulties 
of  all  kinds  which  the  American  engineers  had  to  sur- 
mount, or  the  prodigies  of  daring  and  skill  which  they 
accomplished.  They  had  to  raise  enormous  stones,  mas- 
sive pieces  of  wrought  iron,  heavy  corner-clamps  and  huge 
portions  of  cylinder,  with  an  object-glass  weighing  nearly 
30,000  pounds,  above  the  line  of  perpetual  snow  for  more 
than  10,000  feet  in  height,  after  crossing  desert  prairies, 
impenetrable  forests,  fearful  rapids  far  from  all  centers 
of  population,  and  in  the  midst  of  savage  regions,  in  which 
every  detail  of  life  becomes  an  almost  insoluble  problem. 


230       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

And  yet,  notwithstanding  these  innumerable  obstacles, 
American  genius  triumphed.  In  less  than  a  year  after  the 
commencement  of  the  works,  towards  the  close  of  Septem- 
ber, the  gigantic  reflector  rose  into  the  air  to  a  height  of 
280  feet.  It  was  raised  by  means  of  an  enormous  iron 
crane;  an  ingenious  mechanism  allowed  it  to  be  easily 
worked  towards  all  the  points  of  the  heavens,  and  to  fol- 
low the  stars  from  the  one  horizon  to  the  other  during  their 
journey  through  the  heavens. 

It  had  cost  400,000  dollars.  The  first  time  it  was  di- 
rected towards  the  moon,  the  observers  evinced  both  cu- 
riosity and  anxiety.  What  were  they  about  to  discover 
in  the  field  of  this  telescope  which  magnified  objects  48,- 
000  times?  Would  they  perceive  peoples,  herds  of  lunar 
animals,  towns,  lakes,  seas  ?  No !  there  was  nothing  which 
science  had  not  already  discovered !  and  on  all  the  points 
of  its  disc  the  volcanic  nature  of  the  moon  became  deter- 
minable with  the  utmost  precision. 

But  the  telescope  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,  before  do- 
ing its  duty  to  the  Gun  Club,  rendered  immense  services 
to  astronomy.  Thanks  to  its  penetrative  power,  the  depths 
of  the  heavens  were  sounded  to  the  utmost  extent;  the  ap- 
parent diameter  of  a  great  number  of  stars  was  accurately 
measured;  and  Mr.  Clark,  of  the  Cambridge  staff,  re- 
solved the  Crab  nebula  in  Taurus,  which  the  reflector  of 
Lord  Rosse  had  never  been  able  to  decompose. 


CHAPTER  XXV 

FINAL  DETAILS 

It  was  the  22d  of  November;  the  departure  was  to  take 
place  in  ten  days.  One  operation  alone  remained  to  be  ac- 
complished to  bring  all  to  a  happy  termination;  an  opera- 
tion delicate  and  perilous,  requiring  infinite  precautions, 
and  against  the  success  of  which  Captain  Nicholl  had  laid 
his  third  bet.  It  was,  in  fact,  nothing  less  than  the  load- 
ing of  the  Columbiad,  and  the  introduction  into  it  of  400,- 
000  pounds  of  gun-cotton.  Nicholl  had  thought,  not  per- 
haps without  reason,  that  the  handling  of  such  formidable 
quantities  of  pyroxyle  would,  in  all  probability,  involve  a 
grave  catastrophe;  and  at  any  rate,  that  this  immense  mass 


FINAL  DETAILS  231 

of  eminently  inflammable  matter  would  inevitably  ignite 
when  submitted  to  the  pressure  of  the  projectile. 

There  were  indeed  dangers  accruing  as  before  from  the 
carelessness  of  the  Americans,  but  Barbicane  had  set  his 
heart  on  success,  and  took  all  possible  precautions.  In 
the  first  place,  he  was  very  careful  as  to  the  transportation 
of  the  gun-cotton  to  Stones  Hill.  He  had  it  conveyed  in 
small  quantities,  carefully  packed  in  sealed  cases.  These 
were  brought  by  rail  from  Tampa  Town  to  the  camp,  and 
from  thence  were  taken  to  the  Columbiad  by  barefooted 
workmen,  who  deposited  them  in  their  places  by  means  of 
cranes  placed  at  the  orifice  of  the  cannon.  No  steam-en- 
gine was  permitted  to  work,  and  every  fire  was  ex- 
tinguished within  two  miles  of  the  works. 

Even  in  November  they  feared  to  work  by  day,  lest  the 
sun's  rays  acting  on  the  gun-cotton  might  lead  to  unhappy 
results.  This  led  to  their  working  at  night,  by  light  pro- 
duced in  a  vacuum  by  means  of  Ruhmkorff's  apparatus, 
which  threw  an  artificial  brightness  into  the  depths  of  the 
Columbiad.  There  the  cartridges  were  arranged  with  the 
utmost  regularity,  connected  by  a  metallic  thread,  destined 
to  communicate  to  them  all  simultaneously  the  electric 
spark,  by  which  means  this  mass  of  gun-cotton  was  event- 
ually to  be  ignited. 

By  the  28th  of  November,  800  cartridges  had  been 
placed  in  the  bottom  of  the  Columbiad.  So  far  the  opera- 
tion had  been  successful !  But  what  confusion,  what 
anxieties,  what  struggles  were  undergone  by  President 
Barbicane ;  in  vain  had  he  refused  admission  to  Stones  Hill ; 
every  day  the  inquisitive  neighbors  scaled  the  palisades, 
some  even  carrying  their  imprudence  to  the  point  of  smok- 
ing, while  surrounded  by  bales  of  gun-cotton.  Barbicane 
was  in  a  perpetual  state  of  alarm.  J.  T.  Maston  seconded 
him  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  by  giving  vigorous  chase  to 
the  intruders,  and  carefully  picking  up  the  still  lighted  cigar 
ends  which  the  Yankees  threw  about.  A  somewhat  diffi- 
cult task!  seeing  that  more  than  300,000  persons  were 
gathered  round  the  enclosure.  Michel  Ardan  had  volun- 
teered to  superintend  the  transport  of  the  cartridges  to  the 
mouth  of  the  Columbiad;  but  the  president,  having  sur- 
prised him  with  an  enormous  cigar  in  his  mouth,  while  he 
was  hunting  out  the  rash  spectators  to  whom  he  himself 


232       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

offered  so  dangerous  an  example,  saw  that  lie  coald  not 
trust  this  fearless  smoker,  and  was  therefore  obliged  to 
mount  a  special  guard  over  him. 

At  last,  Providence  being  propitious,  this  wonderful 
loading  came  to  a  happy  termination,  Captain  Nicholl's 
third  bet  being  thus  lost.  It  remained  now  to  introduce  the 
projectile  into  the  Columbiad,  and  to  place  it  on  its  soft 
bed  of  gun-cotton. 

But  before  doing  this,  all  those  things  necessary  for  the 
journey  had  to  be  carefully  arranged  in  the  projectile- 
vehicle.  These  necessaries  were  numerous ;  and  had  Ardan 
been  allowed  to  follow  his  own  wishes,  there  would  have 
been  no  space  remaining  for  the  travelers.  It  is  impossible 
to  conceive  of  half  the  things  this  charming  Frenchman 
wished  to  convey  to  the  moon.  A  veritable  stock  of  useless 
trifles!  But  Barbicane  interfered  and  refused  admission 
to  anything  not  absolutely  needed.  Several  thermometers, 
barometers,  and  telescopes  were  packed  in  the  instrument 
case. 

The  travelers  being  desirous  of  examining  the  moon 
carefully  during  their  voyage,  in  order  to  facilitate  their 
studies,  they  took  with  them  Bceer  and  Moeller's  excellent 
Mappa  Selenographica,  a  masterpiece  of  patience  and  ob- 
servation, which  they  hoped  would  enable  them  to  identify 
those  physical  features  in  the  moon,  with  which  they  were 
acquainted.  This  map  reproduced  with  scrupulous  fidelity 
the  smallest  details  of  the  lunar  surface  which  faces  the 
earth;  the  mountains,  valleys,  craters,  peaks,  and  ridges 
were  all  represented,  with  their  exact  dimensions,  relative 
positions,  and  names;  from  the  mountains  Doerfel  and 
Ieibnitz  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  disc,  to  the  Marefrigoris 
of  the  North  Pole. 

They  took  also  three  rifles  and  three  fowling-pieces,  and 
a  large  quantity  of  balls,  shot,  and  powder. 

"  We  can  not  tell  whom  we  shall  have  to  deal  with,"  said 
Michel  Arden.  "  Men  or  beasts  may  possibly  object  to 
our  visit.     It  is  only  wise  to  take  all  precautions." 

These  defensive  weapons  were  accompanied  by  pickaxes, 
crowbars,  saws,  and  other  useful  implements,  not  to  men- 
tion clothing  adapted  to  every  temperature,  from  that  of 
the  polar  regions  to  that  of  the  torrid  zone. 

Ardan  wished  to  convey  a  number  of  animals  of  different 


FINAL  DETAILS  233 

sorts  (not  indeed  a  pair  of  every  known  species),  as  he  could 
not  see  the  necessity  of  acclimatizing  serpents,  tigers,  alli- 
gators, or  any  other  noxious  beasts  in  the  moon.  "  Never- 
theless," he  said  to  Barbicane,  "  some  valuable  and  useful 
beasts,  bullocks,  cows,  horses,  and  donkeys,  would  bear  the 
journey  well,  and  would  also  be  very  useful  to  us." 

"  I  dare  say,  my  dear  Ardan,"  replied  the  president, 
"  but  our  projectile- vehicle  is  no  Noah's  ark,  from  which 
it  differs  both  in  dimensions  and  object.  Let  us  confine 
ourselves  to  possibilities." 

After  a  prolonged  discussion,  it  was  agreed  that  the 
travelers  should  restrict  themselves  to  a  sporting-dog  be- 
longing to  Nicholl,  and  to  a  large  Newfoundland.  Several 
packets  of  seeds  were  also  included  among  the  necessaries. 
Michel  Ardan,  indeed,  was  anxious  to  add  some  sacks  full 
of  earth  to  sow  them  in ;  as  it  was,  he  took  a  dozen  shrubs, 
carefully  wrapped  up  in  straw,  to  plant  in  the  moon. 

The  important  question  of  provisions  still  remained;  it 
being  necessary  to  provide  against  the  possibility  of  their 
finding  the  moon  absolutely  barren.  Barbicane  managed 
so  successfully,  that  he  supplied  them  with  sufficient  rations 
for  a  year.  These  consisted  of  preserved  meats  and 
vegetables,  reduced  by  strong  hydraulic  pressure  to  the 
smallest  possible  dimensions.  They  were  also  supplied 
with  brandy,  and  took  water  enough  for  two  months,  being 
confident,  from  astronomical  observations,  that  there  was 
no  lack  of  water  on  the  moon's  surface.  As  to  provisions, 
doubtless  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  would  find  nourish- 
ment somewhere  in  the  moon.  Ardan  never  questioned 
this;  indeed,  had  he  done  so,  he  would  never  have  under- 
taken the  journey. 

"  Besides,"  he  said  one  day  to  his  friends,  "  we  shall  not 
be  completely  abandoned  by  our  terrestrial  friends;  they 
will  take  care  not  to  forget  us." 

"  No,  indeed !  "  replied  J.  T.  Maston. 

"  What  do  you  mean  ?  "  asked  Nicholl. 

"  Nothing  would  be  simpler,"  replied  Ardan ;  "  the  Colum- 
biad  will  be  always  there.  Well!  whenever  the  moon  is 
in  a  favorable  condition  as  to  the  zenith,  if  not  to  the 
perigee,  that  is  to  say  a"bout  once  a  year,  could  you  not  send 
us  a  shell  packed  with  provisions,  which  we  might  expect 
on  some  appointed  day?  " 


234       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

"Hurrah!  hurrah!"  cried  J.  T.  Maston;  "what  an  in- 
genious fellow!  what  a  splendid  idea!  Indeed,  my  good 
friends,  we  shall  not  forget  you !  " 

"  I  shall  reckon  upon  you !  Then,  you  see,  we  shall  re- 
ceive news  regularly  from  the  earth,  and  we  shall  indeed 
be  stupid  if  we  hit  upon  no  plan  for  communicating  with 
our  good  friends  here !  " 

These  words  inspired  such  confidence,  that  Michel  Ardan 
carried  all  the  Gun  Club  with  him  in  his  enthusiasm. 
What  he  said  seemed  so  simple  and  so  easy,  so  sure  of  suc- 
cess, that  none  could  be  so  sordidly  attached  to  this  earth, 
as  to  hesitate  to  follow  the  three  travelers  on  their  lunar 
expedition. 

All  being  ready  at  last,  it  remained  to  place  the  projectile 
in  the  Columbiad,  an  operation  abundantly  accompanied  by 
dangers  and  difficulties. 

The  enormous  shell  was  conveyed  to  the  summit  of 
Stones  Hill.  There,  powerful  cranes  raised  it,  and  held 
it  suspended  over  the  mouth  of  the  cylinder. 

It  was  a  fearful  moment!  What  if  the  chains  should 
break  under  its  enormous  weight?  The  sudden  fall  of 
such  a  body  would  inevitably  cause  the  gun-cotton  to  ex- 
plode ! 

Fortunately  this  did  not  happen;  and  some  hours  later 
the  projectile-vehicle  descended  gently  into  the  heart  of  the 
cannon  and  rested  on  its  couch  of  pyroxyle,  a  veritable  bed 
of  explosive  eider-down.  Its  pressure  had  no  result,  other 
than  the  more  effectual  ramming  down  of  the  charge  of  the 
Columbiad. 

"I  have  lost,"  said  the  captain,  who  forthwith  paid 
President  Barbicane  the  sum  of  3,000  dollars. 

Barbicane  did  not  wish  to  accept  the  money  from  one 
of  his  fellow-travelers,  but  gave  way  at  last  before  the  de- 
termination of  Nicholl,  who  wished  before  leaving  the 
earth  to  fulfill  all  his  engagements. 

"  Now,"  said  Michel  Ardan,  "  I  have  only  one  thing 
more  to  wish  for  you,  my  dear  captain." 

"What  is  that?"  asked  Nicholl. 

"  It  is  that  you  may  lose  your  two  other  bets !  Then  we 
shall  be  sure  not  to  be  stopped  on  our  journey !  " 


CHAPTER  XXVI 
fire! 

The  first  of  December  had  arrived!  the  fatal  day!  for, 
if  the  projectile  were  not  discharged  that  very  night  at  ioh. 
46m.  40s.  p.  m.  more  than  eighteen  years  must  roll  by  be- 
fore the  moon  would  again  present  herself  under  the  same 
conditions  of  zenith  and  perigee. 

The  weather  was  magnificent.  Despite  the  approach  of 
winter,  the  sun  shone  brightly,  and  bathed  in  its  radiant 
light  that  earth  which  three  of  its  denizens  were  about  to 
abandon  for  a  new  world. 

How  many  persons  lost  their  rest  on  the  night  which  pre- 
ceded this  long-expected  day!  All  hearts  beat  with  dis- 
quietude, save  only  the  heart  of  Michel  Ardan.  That  im- 
perturbable personage  came  and  went  with  his  habitual 
business-like  air,  while  nothing  whatever  denoted  that  any 
unusual  matter  preoccupied  his  mind. 

After  dawn,  an  innumerable  multitude  covered  the 
prairie  which  extends,  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  round 
Stones  Hill.  Every  quarter  of  an  hour  the  railway 
brought  fresh  accessions  of  sightseers;  and,  according  to 
the  statement  of  the  Tampa  Town  Observer,  not  less  than 
five  millions  of  spectators  thronged  about  on  the  soil  of 
Florida. 

For  a  whole  month  previously,  the  mass  of  these  per- 
sons had  bivouacked  round  the  enclosure,  and  laid  the 
foundations  for  a  town  which  was  afterwards  called  "  Ar- 
dan's  Town."  The  whole  plain  was  covered  with  huts, 
cottages,  and  tents.  Every  nation  under  the  sun  was  rep- 
resented there;  and  every  language  might  be  heard  spoken 
at  the  same  time.  It  was  a  perfect  Babel  re-enacted.  All 
the  various  classes  of  American  society  were  mingled  to- 
gether in  terms  of  absolute  equality.  Bankers,  farmers, 
sailors,  cotton-planters,  brokers,  merchants,  watermen, 
magistrates,  elbowed  each  other  in  the  most  free-and-easy 
way.  Louisiana  Creoles  fraternized  with  farmers  from 
Indiana;  Kentucky  and  Tennessee  gentlemen  and  haughty 
Virginians  conversed  with  trappers  and  the  half-savages  of 
the  lakes  and  butchers  from  Cincinnati.  Broad-brimmed 
white  hats  and  Panamas,  blue  cotton  trowsers,  light  colored 
stockings,  cambric  frills,  were  all  here  displayed;  while 
upon   shirt-fronts,   wristbands,  and  neckties,   upon   every 

235 


236       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

finger,  even  upon  the  very  ears,  they  wore  an  assortment  of 
rings,  shirt-pins,  brooches,  and  trinkets,  of  which  the  value 
only  equaled  the  execrable  taste.  Women,  children  and 
servants,  in  equally  expensive  dress,  surrounded  their  hus- 
bands, fathers,  or  masters,  who  resembled  the  patriarchs 
of  tribes  in  the  midst  of  their  immense  households. 

At  meal-times,  all  fell  to  work  upon  the  dishes  peculiar 
to  the  Southern  States,  and  consumed  with  an  appetite  that 
threatened  speedy  exhaustion  of  the  victualling  powers  of 
Florida,  fricasseed  frogs,  stuffed  monkey,  fish  chowder, 
underdone  'possum,  and  raccoon  steaks.  And  as  for  the 
liquors  which  accompanied  this  indigestible  repast!  The 
shouts,  the  vociferations  that  resounded  through  the  bars 
and  taverns  decorated  with  glasses,  tankards,  and  bottles 
of  marvelous  shape,  mortars  for  pounding  sugar,  and 
bundles  of  straws!  "Mint-julep!"  roars  one  of  the  bar- 
men; "Claret  sangaree!"  shouts  another;  "Cocktail!" 
"  Brandy-smash !  "  "  Real  mint-julep  in  the  new  style !  " 
All  these  cries  intermingled  produced  a  bewildering  and 
deafening  hubbub. 

But  on  this  day,  1st  December,  such  sounds  were  rare. 
No  one  thought  of  eating  or  drinking,  and  at  four  p.  m. 
there  were  vast  numbers  of  spectators  who  had  not  even 
taken  their  customary  lunch !  And,  a  still  more  significant 
fact,  even  the  national  passion  for  play  seemed  quelled  for 
the  time  under  the  general  excitement  of  the  hour. 

Up  till  nightfall,  a  dull,  noiseless  agitation,  such  as  pre- 
cedes great  catastrophes,  ran  through  the  anxious  multi- 
tude. An  indescribable  uneasiness  pervaded  all  minds,  an 
indefinable  sensation  which  oppressed  the  heart.  Every- 
one wished  it  was  over. 

However,  about  seven  oclock,  the  heavy  silence  was 
dissipated.  The  moon  rose  above  the  horizon.  Millions 
of  hurrahs  hailed  her  appearance.  She  was  punctual  to 
the  rendezvous,  and  shouts  of  welcome  greeted  her  on  all 
sides,  as  her  pale  beams  shone  gracefully  in  the  clear 
heavens.  At  this  moment  the  three  intrepid  travelers  ap- 
peared. This  was  the  signal  for  renewed  cries  of  still 
greater  intensity.  Instantly  the  vast  assemblage,  as  with 
one  accord,  struck  up  the  national  hymn  of  the  United 
States,  and  "  Yankee  Doodle,"  sung  by  five  millions  of 
hearty  throats,  rose  like  a  roaring  tempest  to  the  farthest 


FIRE!  237 

limits  of  the  atmosphere.  Then  a  profound  silence  reigned 
throughout  the  crowd. 

The  Frenchman  and  the  two  Americans  had  by  this  time 
entered  the  enclosure  reserved  in  the  center  of  the  multi- 
tude. They  were  accompanied  by  the  members  of  the 
Gun  Club,  and  by  deputations  sent  from  all  the  European 
Observatories.  Barbicane,  cool  and  collected,  was  giving 
his  final  directions.  Nicholl,  with  compressed  lips,  his 
arms  crossed  behind  his  back,  walked  with  a  firm  and 
measured  step.  Michel  Ardan,  always  easy,  dressed  in 
thorough  traveler's  costume,  leathern  gaiters  on  his  legs, 
pouch  by  his  side,  in  loose  velvet  suit,  cigar  in  mouth,  was 
full  of  inexhaustible  gayety,  laughing,  joking,  playing 
pranks  with  J.  T.  Maston.  In  one  word  he  was  the 
thorough  "Frenchman"  (and  worse,  a  "Parisian")  to 
the  last  moment. 

Ten  o'clock  struck!  The  moment  had  arrived  for  tak- 
ing their  places  in  the  projectile!  The  necessary  opera- 
tions for  the  descent,  and  the  subsequent  removal  of  the 
cranes  and  scaffolding  that  inclined  over  the  mouth  of  the 
Columbiad,  required  a  certain  period  of  time. 

Barbicane  had  regulated  his  chronometer  to  the  tenth 
part  of  a  second  by  that  of  Murchison  the  engineer,  who 
was  charged  with  the  duty  of  firing  the  gun  by  means  of 
an  electric  spark.  Thus  the  travelers  enclosed  within  the 
projectile,  were  enabled  to  follow  with  their  eyes  the  impas- 
sive needle  which  marked  the  precise  moment  of  their  de- 
parture. 

The  moment  had  arrived  for  saying  "  Good-bye ! " 
The  scene  was  a  touching  one.  Despite  his  feverish 
gayety,  even  Michel  Ardan  was  touched.  J.  T.  Maston 
had  found  in  his  own  dry  eyes  one  ancient  tear,  which  he 
had  doubtless  reserved  for  the  occasion.  He  dropped  it 
on  the  forehead  of  his  dear  president. 

"  Can  I  not  go?  "  he  said,  "  there  is  still  time !  " 

"  Impossible,  old  fellow ! "  replied  Barbicane.  A  few 
moments  later,  the  three  fellow-travelers  had  ensconced 
themselves  in  the  projectile,  and  screwed  down  the  plate 
which  covered  the  entrance-aperture.  The  mouth  of  the 
Columbiad,  now  completely  disencumbered,  was  open  en- 
tirely to  the  sky. 

The  moon  advanced  upwards  in  a  heaven  of  the  purest 


238       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

clearness,  outshining  in  her  passage  the  twinkling  light  of 
the  stars.  She  passed  over  the  constellation  of  the  Twins, 
and  was  now  nearing  the  half-way  point  between  the  hori- 
zon and  the  zenith.  A  terrible  silence  weighed  upon  the 
entire  scene!  Not  a  breath  of  wind  upon  the  earth!  not 
a  sound  of  breathing  from  the  countless  chests  of  the  spec- 
tators! Their  hearts  seemed  afraid  to  beat!  All  eyes 
were  fixed  upon  the  yawning  mouth  of  the  Columbiad. 

Murchison  followed  with  his  eye  the  hand  of  his  chrono- 
meter. It  wanted  scarce  forty  seconds  to  the  moment  of 
departure,  but  each  second  seemed  to  last  an  age !  At  the 
twentieth  there  was  a  general  shudder,  as  it  occurred  to  the 
minds  of  that  vast  assemblage  that  the  bold  travelers  shut 
up  within  the  projectile  were  also  counting  those  terrible 
seconds.  Some  few  cries  here  and  there  escaped  the  crowd. 
"  Thirty-five ! — thirty-six ! — thirty-seven ! — thirty-eight ! 
—thirty-nine !— forty !     Fire  !  !  !  " 

Instantly  Murchison  pressed  with  his  finger  the  key  of 
the  electric  battery,  restored  the  current  of  the  fluid,  and 
discharged  the  spark  into  the  breech  of  the  Columbiad. 

An  appalling,  unearthly  report  followed  instantly,  such 
as  can  be  compared  to  nothing  whatever  known,  not  even 
to  the  roar  of  thunder,  or  the  blast  of  volcanic  explosions! 
No  words  can  convey  the  slightest  idea  of  the  terrific 
sound !  An  immense  spout  of  fire  shot  up  from  the  bowels 
of  the  earth  as  from  a  crater.  The  earth  heaved  up  and 
with  great  difficulty  some  few  spectators  obtained  a 
momentary  glimpse  of  the  projectile  victoriously  cleaving 
the  air  in  the  midst  of  the  fiery  vapors ! 


CHAPTER   XXVII 

FOUL  WEATHER 

At  the  moment  when  that  pyramid  of  fire  rose  to  a 
prodigious  height  into  the  air,  the  glare  of  the  flame  lit 
up  the  whole  of  Florida;  and  for  a  moment  day  superseded 
night  over  a  considerable  extent  of  the  country.  This  im- 
mense canopy  of  fire  was  perceived  at  a  distance  of  ioo 
miles  out  at  sea,  and  more  than  one  ship's  captain  entered 
in  his  log  the  appearance  of  this  gigantic  meteor. 

The  discharge  of  the  Columbiad  was  accompanied  by  a 


FOUL  WEATHER  239 

perfect  earthquake.  Flordia  was  shaken  to  its  very  depths. 
The  gases  of  the  powder,  expanded  by  heat,  forced  back 
the  atmospheric  strata  with  tremendous  violence,  and  this 
artificial  hurricane  rushed  like  a  waterspout  through  the 
air. 

Not  a  single  spectator  remained  on  his  feet!  Men, 
women,  children,  all  lay  prostrate  like  ears  of  corn  under 
a  tempest.  There  ensued  a  terrible  tumult;  a  large  num- 
ber of  persons  were  seriously  injured.  J.  T.  Maston,  who, 
despite  of  all  dictates  of  prudence  had  kept  in  advance  of 
the  mass,  was  pitched  back  120  feet,  shooting  like  a  pro- 
jectile over  the  heads  of  his  fellow-citizens.  Three  hun- 
dred thousand  persons  remained  deaf  for  a  time,  and  as 
though  struck  stupefied. 

As  soon  as  the  first  effects  were  over,  the  injured,  the 
deaf,  and  lastly,  the  crowd  in  general,  woke  up  with 
frenzied  cries.  "Hurrah  for  Ardan!  Hurrah  for  Bar- 
bicane!  Hurrah  for  Nicholl!"  rose  to  the  skies.  Thou- 
sands of  persons,  noses  in  air,  armed  with  telescopes  and 
race-glasses,  were  questioning  space,  forgetting  all  con- 
tusions and  emotions  in  the  one  idea  of  watching  for  the 
projectile.  They  looked  in  vain!  It  was  no  longer  to  be 
seen,  and  they  were  obliged  to  wait  for  telegrams  from 
Long's  Peak.  The  Director  of  the  Cambridge  Observa- 
tory was  at  his  post  on  the  Rocky  Mountains ;  and  to  him, 
as  a  skillful  and  persevering  astronomer,  all  observations 
had  been  confided. 

But  an  unforseen  phenomenon  came  in  to  subject  the 
public  impatience  to  a  severe  trial. 

The  weather,  hitherto  so  fine,  suddenly  changed ;  the  sky 
became  heavy  with  clouds.  It  could  not  have  been  other- 
wise after  the  terrible  derangement  of  the  atmospheric 
strata,  and  the  dispersion  of  the  enormous  quantity  of 
vapor  arising  from  the  combustion  of  200,000  lbs.  of 
pyroxyle ! 

On  the  morrow  the  horizon  was  covered  with  clouds — 
a  thick  and  impenetrable  curtain  between  eatrh  and  sky, 
which  unhappily  extended  as  far  as  the  Rocky  Mountains. 
It  was  a  fatality !  But  since  man  had  chosen  so  to  disturb 
the  atmosphere,  he  was  bound  to  accept  the  consequences 
of  his  experiment. 

Supposing,  now,  that  the  experiment  had  succeeded,  the 


24o       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

travelers  having  started  on  the  ist  of  December,  at  ioh. 
46m.  40s.  p.  m.,  were  due  on  the  the  4th  at  oh.  p.  m.  at 
their  destination.  So  that  up  to  that  time  it  would  have 
been  very  difficult  after  all  to  have  observed,  under  such 
conditions,  a  body  so  small  as  the  shell.  Therefore  they 
waited  with  what  patience  they  might. 

From  the  4th  to  the  6th  of  December  inclusive,  the 
weather  remaining  much  the  same  in  America,  the  great 
European  instruments  of  Herschel,  Rosse,  and  Foucault, 
were  constantly  directed  towards  the  moon,  for  the  weather 
was  then  magnificent;  but  the  comparative  weakness  of 
their  glasses  prevented  any  trustworthy  observations  being 
made. 

On  the  7th  the  sky  seemed  to  lighten.  They  were  in 
hopes  now,  but  their  hope  was  of  but  short  duration,  and 
at  night  again  thick  clouds  hid  the  starry  vault  from  all 
eyes. 

Matters  were  now  becoming  serious,  when  on  the  9th, 
the  sun  re-appeared  for  an  instant,  as  if  for  the  purpose  of 
teasing  the  Americans.  It  was  received  with  hisses ;  and 
wounded,  no  doubt,  by  such  a  reception,  showed  itself  very 
sparing  of  its  rays. 

On  the  10th,  no  change!  J.  T.  Maston  went  nearly 
mad,  and  great  fears  were  entertained  regarding  the  brain 
of  this  worthy  individual,  which  had  hitherto  been  so  well 
preserved  within  his  gutta-percha  cranium. 

But  on  the  nth  one  of  those  inexplicable  tempests 
peculiar  to  those  intertropical  regions,  was  let  loose  in  the 
atmosphere.  A  terrific  east  wind  swept  away  the  groups  of 
clouds  which  had  been  so  long  gathering,  and  at  night  the 
semi-disc  of  the  orb  of  night  rode  majestically  amidst  the 
soft  constellations  of  the  sky. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 

A    NEW    STAR 

That  very  night,  the  startling  news  so  impatiently 
awaited,  burst  like  a  thunderbolt  over  the  United  States 
of  the  Union,  and  thence,  darting  across  the  ocean,  ran 
through  all  the  telegraphic  wires  of  the  globe.  The  pro- 
jectile had  been  detected,  thanks  to  the  gigantic  reflector  of 

Y.  Ill  Verne 


A  NEW  STAR  241 

Long's  Peak!  Here  is  the  note  received  by  the  Director 
of  the  Observatory  of  Cambridge.  It  contains  the  scien- 
tific conclusion  regarding  this  great  experiment  of  the  Gun 
Club. 

"  Long's  Peak,  December  12. 

"  To  the  Officers  of  the  Observatory  of  Cambridge. 

"The  projectile  discharged  by  the  Columbiad  at  Stones 
Hill  has  been  detected  by  Messrs.  Belfast  and  J.  T.  Maston, 
1 2th  December,  at  8  47  p.  m.,  the  moon  having  entered  her 
last  quarter.  This  projectile  has  not  arrived  at  its  destina- 
tion. It  has  passed  by  the  side;  but  sufficiently  near  to  be 
retained  by  the  lunar  attraction. 

"  The  rectilinear  movement  has  thus  become  changed 
into  a  circular  motion  of  extreme  velocity,  and  it  is  now- 
pursuing  an  elliptical  orbit  round  the  moon,  of  which  it  has 
become  a  true  satellite. 

"  The  elements  of  this  new  star  we  have  as  yet  been  un- 
able to  determine;  we  do  not  yet  know  the  velocity  of  its 
passage.  The  distance  which  separates  it  from  the  surface 
of  the  moon  may  be  estimated  at  about  2,833  miles. 

"  However,  two  hypotheses  come  here  into  our  consid- 
eration. 

"  1.  Either  the  attraction  of  the  moon  will  lend  by  draw- 
ing them  into  itself,  and  the  travelers  will  attain  their  des- 
ination;  or, — 

"  2.  The  projectile,  following  an  immutable  law,  will 
continue  to  gravitate  round  the  moon  till  the  end  of  time. 

"  At  some  future  time,  our  observations  will  be  able  to 
determine  this  point,  but  till  then  the  experiment  of  the 
Gun  Club  can  have  no  other  result  than  to  have  provided 
our  solar  system  with  a  new  star. 

"J.Belfast/' 

To  how  many  questions  did  this  unexpected  denouement 
give  rise?  What  mysterious  results  was  the  future  re- 
serving for  the  investigations  of  science?  At  all  events, 
the  names  of  Nicholl,  Barbicane,  and  Michel  Ardan  were 
certain  to  be  immortalized  in  the  annals  of  astronomy! 

When  the  dispatch  from  Long's  Peak  had  once  become 
known,  there  was  but  one  universal  feeling  of  surprise 
and  alarm.     Was  it  possible  to  go  to  the  aid  of  these  bold 


242       FROM  THE  EARTH  TO  THE  MOON 

travelers?  No!  for  they  had  placed  themselves  beyond 
the  pale  of  humanity,  by  crossing  the  limits  imposed  by 
the  Creator  on  his  earthly  creatures.  They  had  air  enough 
for  two  months;  they  had  victuals  enough  for  twelve; — 
but  after  that?.  There  was  only  one  man  who  would  not 
admit  that  the  situation  was  desperate, — he  alone  had  con- 
fidence ;  and  that  was  their  devoted  friend  J.  T.  Maston. 

Besides,  he  never  let  them  get  out  of  sight.  His  home 
was  henceforth  the  post  at  Long's  Peak;  his  horizon,  the 
mirror  of  that  immense  reflector.  As  soon  as  the  moon 
rose  above  the  horizon,  he  immediately  caught  her  in  the 
field  of  the  telescope;  he  never  let  her  go  for  an  instant  out 
of  his  sight,  and  followed  her  assiduously  in  her  course 
through  the  stellar  spaces.  He  watched  with  untiring 
patience  the  passage  of  the  projectile  across  her  silvery  disc, 
and  really  the  worthy  man  remained  in  perpetual  communi- 
cation with  his  three  friends,  whom  he  did  not  despair  of 
seeing  again  some  day. 

"  Those  three  men,"  said  he,  "  have  carried  into  space  all 
the  resources  of  art,  science,  and  industry.  With  that,  one 
can  do  anything;  and  you  will  see  that,  some  day,  they  will 
come  put  all  right." 


THE  END 


A  Tour  of  the  Moon 


A  Tour  of  the  Moon 


CHAPTER  I 

FROM   TWENTY   MINUTES   PAST   TEN  TO   FORTY-SEVEN    MIN- 
UTES  PAST  TEN   P.    M. 

S  ten  o'clock  struck,  Michel  Ardan,  Barbicane, 
and  Nicholl,  took  leave  of  the  numerous 
friends  they  were  leaving  on  the  earth.  The 
two  dogs,  destined  to  propagate  the  canine  race 
on  the  lunar  continents,  were  already  shut  up 
in  the  projectile. 
The  three  travelers  approached  the  orifice  of  the  enor- 
mous cast-iron  tube,  and  a  crane  let  them  down  to  the 
conical  top  of  the  projectile.  There,  an  opening  made  for 
the  purpose  gave  them  access  to  the  aluminium  car.  The 
tackle  belonging  to  the  crane  being  hauled  from  outside, 
the  mouth  of  the  Columbiad  was  instantly  disencumbered 
of  its  last  supports. 

Nicholl,  once  introduced  with  his  companions  inside  the 
projectile,  began  to  close  the  opening  by  means  of  a  strong 
plate,  held  in  position  by  powerful  screws.  Other  plates, 
closely  fitted,  covered  the  lenticular  glasses,  and  the  travel- 
ers, hermetically  enclosed  in  their  metal  prison,  were 
plunged  in  profound  darkness. 

"And  now,  my  dear  companions,"  said  Michel  Ardan, 
"  let  us  make  ourselves  at  home ;  I  am  a  domesticated  man 
and  strong  in  housekeeping.  We  are  bound  to  make  the 
best  of  our  new  lodgings,  and  make  ourselves  comfortable. 
And  first  let  us  try  and  see  a  little.  Gas  was  not  invented 
for  moles." 

So  saying,  the  thoughtless  fellow  lit  a  match  by  striking 
it  on  the  sole  of  his  boot;  and  approached  the  burner  fixed 
to  the  receptacle,  in  which  the  carbonized  hydrogen,  stored 
at  high  pressure,  sufficed  for  the  lighting  and  warming  of 
the  projectile  for  a  hundred  and  forty-four  hours,  or  six 
days  and  six  nights.  The  gas  caught  fire,  and  thus  lighted, 
the  projectile  looked  like  a  comfortable  room  with  thickly 
padded  walls,  furnished  with  a  circular  divan,  and  a  roof 
rounded  in  the  shape  of  a  dome. 

245 


246  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

The  objects  it  contained,  arms,  instruments,  and  utensils 
securely  fastened  against  the  rounds  of  wadding,  could 
bear  the  shock  of  departure  with  impunity.  Humanly 
speaking,  every  possible  precaution  had  been  taken  to  bring 
this  rash  experiment  to  a  successful  termination. 

Michel  Ardan  examined  everything,  and  declared  him- 
self satisfied  with  his  installation. 

"  It  is  a  prison,"  said  he,  "  but  a  traveling  prison ;  and, 
with  the  right  of  putting  my  nose  to  the  window,  I  could 
well  stand  a  lease  of  a  hundred  years.  You  smile,  Barbi- 
cane.  Have  you  any  arriere-pensee?  Do  you  say  to 
yourself^  '  This  prison  may  be  our  tomb  ?  '  Tomb,  per- 
haps; still  I  would  not  change  it  for  Mahomet's,  which 
floats  in  space,  but  never  advances  an  inch !  " 

Whilst  Michel  Ardan  was  speaking,  Barbicane  and 
Nicholl  were  making  their  last  preparations. 

Nicholl's  chronometer  marked  twenty  minutes  past  ten 
p.  m.  when  the  three  travelers  were  finally  enclosed  in  their 
projectile.  This  chronometer  was  set  within  the  tenth  of 
a  second  by  that  of  Murchison  the  engineer.  Barbicane 
consulted  it. 

"  My  friends,"  said  he,  "  it  is  twenty  minutes  past  ten. 
At  forty-seven  minutes  past  ten  Murchison  will  launch  the 
electric  spark  on  the  wire  which  communicates  with  the 
charge  of  the  Columbiad.  At  that  precise  moment  we  shall 
leave  our  spheroid.  Thus  we  have  still  twenty-seven  min- 
utes to  remain  on  the  earth." 

"Twenty-six  minutes  thirteen  seconds,"  replied  the 
methodical  Nicholl. 

"  Well !  "  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan,  in  a  good-humored 
tone,  "much  may  be  done  in  twenty-six  minutes.  The 
gravest  questions  of  morals  and  politics  may  be  discussed, 
and  even  solved.  Twenty-six  minutes  well  employed  are 
worth  more  than  twenty-six  years  in  which  nothing  is 
done.  Some  seconds  of  a  Pascal  or  a  Newton  are  more 
precious  than  the  whole  existence  of  a  crowd  of  raw 
simpletons " 

"And  you  conclude,  then,  you  everlasting  talker? " 

asked  Barbicane. 

"  I  conclude  that  we  have  twenty-six  minutes  left,"  re- 
plied Ardan. 

"  Twenty- four  only,"  said  Nicholl. 


FROM  TWENTY  PAST  TEN  247 

"  Well,  twenty-four,  if  you  like,  my  noble  captain,"  said 
Ardan;  "twenty-four  minutes  in  which  to  investigate " 

"  Michel,"  said  Barbicane,  "  during  the  passage  we  shall 
have  plenty  of  time  to  investigate  the  most  difficult  ques- 
tions. For  the  present  we  must  occupy  ourselves  with  our 
departure." 

"Are  we  not  ready?  " 

"Doubtless;  but  there  are  still  some  precautions  to  be 
taken,  to  deaden  as  much  as  possible  the  first  shock." 

"Have  we  not  the  water-cushions  placed  between  the 
partition-breaks,  whose  elasticity  will  sufficiently  protect 
us?" 

"  I  hope  so,  Michel,"  replied  Barbicane,  gently,  "  but  I 
am  not  sure." 

"  Ah,  the  ^  joker !  "  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan.  "  He 
hopes! — He  is  not  sure! — and  he  waits  for  the  moment 
when  we  are  encased  to  make  this  deplorable  admission! 
I  beg  to  be  allowed  to  get  out !  " 

"And  how?"  asked  Barbicane. 

"Hump!"  said  Michel  Ardan,  "it  is  not  easy;  we  are 
in  the  train,  and  the  guard's  whistle  will  sound  before 
twenty-four  minutes  are  over." 

"  Twenty"  said  Nicholl. 

For  some  moments  the  three  travelers  looked  at  each 
other.  Then  they  began  to  examine  the  objects  imprisoned 
with  them. 

"Everything  is  in  its  place,"  said  Barbicane.  "We 
have  now  to  decide  how  we  can  best  place  ourselves  to  re- 
sist the  shock.  Position  cannot  be  an  indifferent  matter; 
and  we  must,  as  much  as  possible,  prevent  the  rush  of  blood 
to  the  head." 

"Just  so,"  said  Nicholl. 

"  Then,"  replied  Michel  Ardan,  ready  to  suit  the  action 
to  the  word,  "  let  us  put  our  heads  down  and  our  feet  in  the 
air,  like  the  clowns  in  the  grand  circus." 
#  "  No,"  said  Barbicane,  "  let  us  stretch  ourselves  on  our 
sides;  we  shall  resist  the  shock  better  that  way.  Remem- 
ber that,  when  the  projectile  starts,  it  matters  little  whether 
we  are  in  it  or  before  it;  it  amounts  to  much  the  same 
thing." 

"  If  it  is  only  '  much  the  same  thing/  I  may  cheer  up," 
said  Michel  Ardan. 


248  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"Do  you  approve  of  my  idea,  Nicholl?"  asked  Bar- 
bicane. 

"  Entirely,"  replied  the  captain.  "  We've  still  thirteen 
minutes  and  a  half." 

"That  Nicholl  is  not  a  man,"  exclaimed  Michel;  "he 
is  a  chronometer  with  seconds,  an  escape,  and  eight  holes." 

But  his  companions  were  not  listening;  they  were  taking 
up  their  last  positions  with  the  most  perfect  coolness. 
They  were  like  two  methodical  travelers  in  a  car,  seeking 
to  place  themselves  as  comfortably  as  possible. 

We  might  well  ask  ourselves  of  what  materials  are  the 
hearts  of  these  Americans  made,  to  whom  the  approach  of 
the  most  frightful  danger  added  no  pulsation. 

Three  thick  and  solidly-made  couches  had  been  placed 
in  the  projectile.  Nicholl  and  Barbicane  placed  them  in 
the  center  of  the  disc  forming  the  floor.  There  the  three 
travelers  were  to  stretch  themselves  some  moments  before 
their  departure. 

During  this  time,  Ardan,  not  being  able  to  keep  still, 
turned  in  his  narrow  prison  like  a  wild  beast  in  a  cage, 
chatting  with  his  friends,  speaking  to  the  dogs  Diana  and 
Satellite,  to  whom,  as  may  be  seen,  he  had  given  significant 
names. 

"Ah,  Diana!  Ah,  Satellite!"  he  exclaimed,  teasing 
them ;  "  so  you  are  going  to  show  the  moon-dogs  the  good 
habits  of  the  dogs  of  the  earth !  That  will  do  honor  to  the 
canine  race !  If  ever  we  do  come  down  again,  I  will  bring 
a  cross  type  of  'moon-dogs,'  which  will  make  a  stir!" 

"  If  there  are  dogs  in  the  moon,"  said  Barbicane. 

"There  are,"  said  Michel  Ardan,  "just  as  there  are 
horses,  cows,  donkeys,  and  chickens.  I  bet  that  we  shall 
find  chickens." 

"  A  hundred  dollars  we  shall  find  none ! "  said  Nicholl. 

"  Done,  my  captain ! "  replied  Ardan,  clasping  Nicholl's 
hand.  "  But,  by  the  by,  you  have  already  lost  three  bets 
with  our  president,  as  the  necessary  funds  for  the  enter- 
prise have  been  found,  as  the  operation  of  casting  has  been 
successful,  and  lastly,  as  the  Columbiad  has  been  loaded 
without  accident,  six  thousand  dollars." 

"  Yes,"  replied  Nicholl.  "  Thirty-seven  minutes  six 
seconds  past  ten." 

"  It  is  understood,  captain.     Well,  before  another  quar- 


FROM  TWENTY  PAST  TEN  249 

ter  of  an  hour  you  will  have  to  count  9,000  dollars  to  the 
president;  4,000  because  the  Columbiad  will  not  burst,  and 
5,000  because  the  projectile  will  rise  more  than  six  miles  in 
the  air." 

"  I  have  the  dollars,"  replied  Nicholl,  slapping  the  pocket 
of  his  coat.     "  I  only  ask  to  be  allowed  to  pay." 

"  Come,  Nicholl,  I  see  that  you  are  a  man  of  method, 
which  I  could  never  be ;  but  indeed  you  have  made  a  series 
of  bets  of  very  little  advantage  to  yourself,  allow  me  to  tell 
you." 

"And  why?"  asked  Nicholl. 

"  Because,  if  you  gain  the  first,  the  Columbiad  will  have 
burst,  and  the  projectile  with  it;  and  Barbicane  will  no 
longer  be  there  to  reimburse  your  dollars." 

"  My  stake  is  deposited  at  the  bank  in  Baltimore,"  re- 
plied Barbicane  simply;  "  and  if  Nicholl  is  not  there,  it  will 
go  to  his  heirs.' 

"Ah,  you  practical  man!"  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan; 
"  I  admire  you  the  more  for  not  being  able  to  understand 
you." 

"Forty-two  minutes  past  ten!"  said  Nicholl. 

"  Only  five  minutes  more !  "  answered  Barbicane. 

"  Yes,  five  little  minutes !  "  replied  Michel  Ardan ;  "  and 
we  are  enclosed  in  a  projectile,  at  the  bottom  of  a  gun  900 
feet  long!  And  under  this  projectile  are  rammed  400,000 
pounds  of  gun-cotton,  which  is  equal  to  1,600,000  pounds 
of  ordinary  powder!  And  friend  Murchison,  with  his 
chronometer  m  hand,  his  eye  fixed  on  the  needle,  his  finger 
on  the  electric  apparatus,  is  counting  the  seconds  prepara- 
tory to  launching  us  into  interplanetary  space." 

"  Enough,  Michel,  enough !  "  said  Barbicane,  in  a  serious 
voice;  "let  us  prepare.  A  few  instants  alone  separate  us 
from  an  eventful  moment.  One  clasp  of  the  hand,  my 
friends." 

"Yes,"  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan,  more  moved  than  he 
wished  to  appear;  and  the  three  bold  companions  were 
united  in  a  last  embrace. 

"  God  preserve  us ! "  said  the  religious  Barbicane. 

Michel  Ardan  and  Nicholl  stretched  themselves  on  the 
couches  placed  in  the  center  of  the  disc. 

"  Forty-seven  minutes  past  ten ! "  murmured  the  cap- 
tain. 


250  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"  Twenty  seconds  more !  "  Barbicane  quickly  put  out  the 
gas  and  lay  down  by  his  companions,  and  the  profound 
silence  was  only  broken  by  the  ticking  of  the  chronometer 
marking  the  seconds. 

Suddenly  a  dreadful  shock  was  felt,  and  the  projectile, 
under  the  force  of  six  billions  of  litres  of  gas,  developed 
by  the  combustion  of  the  pyroxyle,  mounted  into  space. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE    FIRST    HALF-HOUR 

What  had  happened?  What  effect  had  this  frightful 
shock  produced?  Had  the  ingenuity  of  the  constructors 
of  the  projectile  obtained  any  happy  result?  Had  the 
shock  been  deadened,  thanks  to  the  springs,  the  four  plugs, 
the  water-cushions,  and  the  partition-breaks?  Had  they 
been  able  to  subdue  the  frightful  pressure  of  the  initiatory 
speed  of  more  than  11,000  yards,  which  was  enough  to 
traverse  Paris  or  New  York  in  a  second?  This  was  evi- 
dently the  question  suggested  to  the  thousand  spectators 
of  this  moving  scene.  They  forgot  the  aim  of  the  journey, 
and  thought  only  of  the  travelers.  And  if  one  amongst 
them — Joseph  T.  Maston  for  example — could  have  cast 
one  glimpse  into  the  projectile,  what  would  he  have  seen? 

Nothing  then.  The  darkness  was  profound.  But  its 
cylindro-conical  partitions  had  resisted  wonderfully.  Not 
a  rent  or  a  dent  anywhere !  The  wonderful  projectile  was 
not  even  heated  under  the  intense  deflagration  of  the 
powder,  nor  liquefied,  as  they  seemed  to  fear,  in  a  shower 
of  aluminium. 

The  interior  showed  but  little  disorder;  indeed,  only  a 
few  objects  had  been  violently  thrown  towards  the  roof; 
but  the  most  important  seemed  not  to  have  suffered  from 
the  shock  at  all;  their  fixtures  were  intact. 

On  the  movable  disc,  sunk  down  to  the  bottom  by  the 
smashing  of  the  partition-breaks  and  the  escape  of  the 
water,  three  bodies  lay  apparently  lifeless.  Barbicane, 
Nicholl,  and  Michel  Ardan — did  they  still  breathe?  or  was 
the  projectile  nothing  now  but  a  metal  coffin,  bearing  three 
corpses  into  space? 

Some  minutes  after  the  departure  of  the  projectile,  one 


THE  FIRST  HALF-HOUR  251 

of  the  bodies  moved,  shook  its  arms,  lifted  its  head,  and 
finally  succeeded  in  getting  on  its  knees.  It  was  Michel 
Ardan.  He  felt  himself  all  over,  gave  a  sonorous 
"  Hem!  "  and  then  said: 

"Michel  Ardan  is  whole.     How  about  the  others?" 

The  courageous  Frenchman  tried  to  rise,  but  could  not 
stand.  His  head  swam,  from  the  rush  of  blood;  he  was 
blind;  he  was  like  a  drunken  man. 

"  Bur-r !  "  said  he.  "  It  produces  the  same  effect  as  two 
bottles  of  Corton,  though  perhaps  less  agreeable  to  swal- 
low." Then  passing  his  hand  several  times  across  his  fore- 
head and  rubbing  his  temples,  he  called  in  a  firm  voice : 

"Nicholl!     Barbicane!" 

He  waited  anxiously.  No  answer;  not  even  a  sigh  to 
show  that  the  hearts  of  his  companions  were  still  beating. 
He  called  again.     The  same  silence. 

"  The  devil !  "  he  exclaimed.  "  They  look  as  if  they  had 
fallen  from  a  fifth  story  on  their  heads.  Bah !  "  he  added, 
with  that  imperturbable  confidence  which  nothing  could 
check,  "  if  a  Frenchman  can  get  on  his  knees,  two  Ameri- 
cans ought  to  be  able  to  get  on  their  feet.  But  first  let  us 
light  up." 

Ardan  felt  the  tide  of  life  return  by  degrees.  His  blood 
became  calm,  and  returned  to  its  accustomed  circulation. 
Another  effort  restored  his  equilibrium.  He  succeeded  in 
rising,  drew  a  match  from  his  pocket,  and  approaching  the 
burner  lighted  it.  The  receiver  had  not  suffered  at  all. 
The  gas  had  not  escaped.  Besides,  the  smell  would  have 
betrayed  it;  and  in  that  case  Michel  Ardan  could  not  have 
carried  a  lighted  match  with  impunity  through  the  space 
filled  with  hydrogen.  The  gas  mixing  with  the  air  would 
have  produced  a  detonating  mixture,  and  the  explosion 
would  have  finished  what  the  shock  had  perhaps  begun. 
When  the  burner  was  lit,  Ardan  leaned  over  the  bodies  of 
his  companions ;  they  were  lying  one  on  the  other,  an  inert 
mass,  Nicholl  above,  Barbicane  underneath. 

Ardan  lifted  the  captain,  propped  him  up  against  the 
divan,  and  began  to  rub  vigorously.  This  means,  used 
with  judgment,  restored  Nicholl,  who  opened  his  eyes,  and 
instantly  recovering  his  presence  of  mind,  seized  Ardan's 
hand  and  looked  around  him. 

"And  Barbicane?"  said  he. 


252  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"  Each  in  turn,"  replied  Michel  Ardan.  "  I  began  witH 
you,  Nicholl,  because  you  were  on  the  top.  Now  let  us 
look  to  Barbicane."  Saying  which,  Ardan  and  Nicholl 
raised  the  president  of  the  Gun  Club  and  laid  him  on  the 
divan.  He  seemed  to  have  suffered  more  than  either  of 
his  companions ;  he  was  bleeding,  but  Nicholl  was  reassured 
by  finding  that  the  hemorrhage  came  from  a  slight  wound 
on  the  shoulder,  a  mere  graze,  which  he  bound  up  carefully. 

Still,  Barbicane  was  a  long  time  coming  to  himself, 
which  frightened  his  friends,  who  did  not  spare  friction. 

"  He  breathes  though,"  said  Nicholl,  putting  his  ear  to 
the  chest  of  the  wounded  man. 

"  Yes,"  replied  Ardan,  "  he  breathes  like  a  man  who  has 
some  notion  of  that  daily  operation.  Rub,  Nicholl;  let 
us  rub  harder."  And  the  two  improvised  practitioners 
worked  so  hard  and  so  well  that  Barbicane  recovered  his 
senses.  He  opened  his  eyes,  sat  up,  took  his  two  friends 
by  the  hands,  and  his  first  words  were : 

"  Nicholl,  are  we  moving?  " 

Nicholl  and  Ardan  looked  at  each  other;  they  had  not 
yet  troubled  themselves  about  the  projectile,  the  first 
thought  had  been  for  the  traveler,  not  for  the  car. 

"Well,    are   we   really   moving?"    repeated   Barbicane. 

"Or  quietly  resting  on  the  soil  of  Florida?"  asked 
Nicholl. 

"Or  at  the  bottom  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico?"  added 
Michel  Ardan. 

"  What  an  idea !  "  exclaimed  the  president. 

And  this  double  hypothesis  suggested  by  his  companions 
had  the  effect  of  recalling  him  to  his  senses.  In  any  case 
they  could  not  yet  decide  on  the  position  of  the  projectile. 
Its  apparent  immovability,  and  the  want  of  communication 
with  the  outside,  prevented  them  from  solving  the  question. 
Perhaps  the  projectile  was  unwinding  its  course  through 
space.  Perhaps  after  a  short  rise  it  had  fallen  upon  the 
earth,  or  even  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico — a  fall  which  the 
narrowness  of  the  peninsula  of  Florida  would  render  not 
impossible. 

The  case  was  serious,  the  problem  interesting,  and  one 
that  must  be  solved  as  soon  as  possible.  Thus,  highly  ex- 
cited, Barbicane's  moral  energy  triumphed  over  physical 
weakness,  and  he  rose  to  his  feet.     He  listened.     Outside 


THE  FIRST  HALF-HOUR  253 

was  perfect  silence ;  but  the  thick  padding  was  enough  to 
intercept  all  sounds  coming  from  the  earth.  But  one  cir- 
cumstance struck  Barbicane,  viz.,  that  the  temperature  in- 
side the  projectile  was  singularly  high.  The  president 
drew  a  thermometer  from  its  case,  and  consulted  it.  The 
instrument  showed  81  °  Fahr. 

"  Yes,"  he  exclaimed,  "  yes,  we  are  moving !  This  sti- 
fling heat,  penetrating  through  the  partitions  of  the  pro- 
jectile, is  produced  by  its  friction  on  the  atmospheric 
strata.  It  will  soon  diminish,  because  we  are  already  float- 
ing in  space,  and  after  having  been  nearly  stifled,  we  shall 
have  to  suffer  intense  cold." 

"What!"  said  Michel  Ardan.  "According  to  your 
showing,  Barbicane,  we  are  already  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
terrestrial  atmosphere?" 

"Without  a  doubt,  Michel.  Listen  to  me.  It  is  fifty- 
five  minutes  past  ten ;  we  have  been  gone  about  eight  min- 
utes; and  if  our  initiatory  speed  has  not  been  checked  by 
the  friction,  six  seconds  would  be  enough  for  us  to  pass 
through  the  forty  miles  of  atmosphere  which  surrounds 
the  globe." 

"Just  so,"  replied  Nicholl;  "but  in  what  proportion  do 
you  estimate  the  diminution  of  speed  by  friction?" 

"  In  the  proportion  of  one-third,  Nicholl.  This  diminu- 
tion is  considerable,  but  according  to  my  calculations  it  is 
nothing  less.  If,  then,  we  had  an  initiatory  speed  of  12,- 
000  yards,  on  leaving  the  atmosphere  this  speed  would  be 
reduced  to  9,165  yards.  In  any  case  we  have  already 
passed  through  this  interval,  and " 

"  And  then,"  said  Michel  Ardan,  "  friend  Nicholl  has 
lost  his  two  bets :  four  thousand  dollars  because  the  Colum- 
biad  did  not  burst;  five  thousand  dollars  because  the  pro- 
jectile has  risen  more  than  six  miles.  Now,  Nicholl,  pay; 
up" 

"  Let  us  prove  it  first,"  said  the  captain,  "  and  we  will 
pay  afterwards.  It  is  quite  possible  that  Barbicane's  rea- 
soning is  correct,  and  that  I  have  lost  my  nine  thousand 
dollars.  But  a  new  hypothesis  presents  itself  to  my  mind, 
and  it  annuls  the  wager." 

"  What  is  that  ?  "  asked  Barbicane  quickly. 

"  The  hypothesis  that,  for  some  reason  or  other,  fire  was 
never  set  to  the  powder,  we  have  not  started  at  all." 


1254  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"My  goodness,  captain,"  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan, 
"  that  hypothesis  is  worthy  of  my  brain !  It  cannot  be  a 
serious  one.  For  have  we  not  been  half  annihilated  by  the 
shock?  Did  I  not  recall  you  to  life?  Is  not  the  presi- 
dent's shoulder  still  bleeding  from  the  blow  it  has  re- 
ceived?" 

"  Granted,"  replied  Nicholl;  "but  one  question." 

"Well,  captain?" 

"  Did  you  hear  the  detonation,  which  certainly  ought  to 
be  loud  ?  " 

"  No,"  replied  Ardan,  much  surprised ;  "certainly  I  did 
not  hear  the  detonation." 

"And  you,  Barbicane?" 

"  Nor  I,  either." 

"Very  well,"  said  Nicholl. 

"Well  now,"  murmured  the  president,  "why  did  we 
not  hear  the  detonation  ?  " 

The  three  friends  looked  at  each  other  with  a  discon- 
certed air.  It  was  quite  an  inexplicable  phenomenon. 
The  projectile  had  started,  and  consequently  there  must 
have  been  a  detonation. 

"Let  us  first  find  out  where  we  are,"  said  Barbicane, 
"  and  let  down  the  panel." 

This  very  simple  operation  was  soon  accomplished. 
_  The  nuts  which  held  the  bolts  to  the  outer  plates  of  the 
right-hand  scuttle  gave  way  under  the  pressure  of  the  Eng- 
lish wrench.  These  bolts  were  pushed  outside,  and  buffers 
covered  with  india-rubber  stopped  up  the  holes  which  let 
them_ through.  Immediately  the  outer  plate  fell  back  upon 
its  hinges  like  a  porthole,  and  the  lenticular  glass  which 
closed  the  scuttle  appeared.  A  similar  one  was  let  into  the 
thick  partition  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  projectile,  an- 
other in  the  top  of  the  dome,  and  finally  a  fourth  in  the 
middle  of  the  base.  They  could,  therefore,  make  observa- 
tions in  four  different  directions:  the  firmament  by  the 
side  and  most  direct  windows,  the  earth  or  the  moon  by 
the  upper  and  under  openings  in  the  projectile. 

Barbicane  and  his  two  companions  immediately  rushed 
to  the  uncovered  window.  But  it  was  lit  by  no  ray  of 
light.  Profound  darkness  surrounded  them,  which,  how- 
ever, did  not  prevent  the  president  from  exclaiming : 

"  No,  my  friends,  we  have  not  fallen  back  upon  the 


THE  FIRST  HALF-HOUR  255 

earth;  no,  nor  are  we  submerged  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico. 
Yes!  we  are  mounting  into  space.  See  those  stars  shining 
in  the  night,  and  that  impenetrable  darkness  heaped  up  be- 
tween the  earth  and  us !  " 

"  Hurrah !  hurrah !  "  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan  and  Nicholl 
in  one  voice. 

Indeed,  this  thick  darkness  proved  that  the  projectile 
had  left  the  earth,  for  the  soil,  brilliantly  lit  by  the  moon- 
beams, would  have  been  visible  to  the  travelers,  if  they  had 
been  lying  on  its  surface.  This  darkness  also  showed  that 
the  projectile  had  passed  the  atmospheric  strata,  for  the 
diffused  light  spread  in  the  air  would  have  been  reflected 
on  the  metal  walls,  which  reflection  was  wanting.  This 
light  would  have  lit  the  window,  and  the  window  was  dark. 
Doubt  was  no  longer  possible;  the  travelers  had  left  the 
earth. 

"  I  have  lost,"  said  Nicholl. 

"  I  congratulate  you,"  replied  Ardan. 

"  Here  are  the  nine  thousand  dollars,"  said  the  captain, 
drawing  a  roll  of  paper  dollars  from  his  pocket. 

"  Will  you  have  a  receipt  for  it?  "  asked  Barbicane,  tak- 
ing the  sum. 

"If  you  do  not  mind,"  answered  Nicholl;  "it  is  more 
business-like." 

And  coolly  and  seriously,  as  if  he  had  been  at  his  strong- 
box, the  president  drew  forth  his  note-book,  tore  out  a 
blank  leaf,  wrote  a  proper  receipt  in  pencil,  dated  and 
signed  it  with  the  usual  flourish,  and  gave  it  to  the  captain, 
who  carefully  placed  it  in  his  pocket-book.  Michel  Ardan, 
taking  off  his  hat,  bowed  to  his  two  companions  without 
speaking.  So  much  formality  under  such  circumstances 
left  him  speechless.  He  had  never  before  seen  any  thing 
so  "American." 

This  affair  settled,  Barbicane  and  Nicholl  had  returned 
to  the  window,  and  were  watching  the  constellations.  The 
stars  looked  like  bright  points  on  the  black  sky.  But  from 
that  side  they  could  not  see  the  orb  of  night,  which,  travel- 
ing from  east  to  west,  would  rise  by  degrees  towards  the 
zenith.  Its  absence  drew  the  following  remark  from 
Ardan. 

"And  the  moon;  will  she  perchance  fail  at  our 
rendezvous  ?  " 


256*  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"Do  not  alarm  yourself,"  said  Barbicane;  "our  future 
globe  is  at  its  post,  but  we  cannot  see  her  from  this  side; 
let  us  open  the  other." 

As  Barbicane  was  about  leaving  the  window  to  open  the 
opposite  scuttle,  his  attention  was  attracted  by  the  approach 
of  a  brilliant  object.  It  was  an  enormous  disc,  whose 
colossal  dimensions  could  not  be  estimated.  Its  face, 
which  was  turned  to  the  earth,  was  very  bright.  One 
might  have  thought  it  a  small  moon  reflecting  the  light 
of  the  larger  one.  She  advanced  with  great  speed,  and 
semed  to  describe  an  orbit  round  the  earth,  which  would 
intersect  the  passage  of  the  projectile.  This  body  revolved 
upon  its  axis,  and  exhibited  the  phenomena  of  all  celestial 
bodies  abandoned  in  space. 

"  Ah !  "  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan,  "  what  is  that?  another 
projectile?" 

Barbicane  did  not  answer.  The  appearance  of  this  enor- 
mous body  surprised  and  troubled  him.  A  collison  was 
possible,  and  might  be  attended  with  deplorable  results; 
either  the  projectile  would  deviate  from  its  path,  or  a  shock, 
breaking  its  impetus,  might  precipitate  it  to  the  earth;  or, 
lastly,  it  might  be  irresistibly  drawn  away  by  the  power- 
ful asteroid.  The  president  caught  at  a  glance  the  conse- 
quences of  these  three  hypotheses,  either  of  which  would, 
one  way  or  the  other,  bring  their  experiment  to  an  unsuc- 
cessful and  fatal  termination.  His  companions  stood 
silently  looking  into  space.  The  object  grew  rapidly  as  it 
approached  them,  and  by  an  optical  illusion  the  projectile 
seemed  to  be  throwing  itself  before  it. 

"  By  Jove !  "  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan,  "  we  shall  run 
into  one  another !  " 

Instinctively  the  travelers  drew  back.  Their  dread  was 
great,  but  it  did  not  last  many  seconds.  The  asteroid 
passed  several  hundred  yards  from  the  projectile  and  dis- 
appeared, not  so  much  from  the  rapidity  of  its  course,  as 
that  its  face  being  opposite  the  moon,  it  was  suddenly 
merged  into  the  perfect  darkness  of  space. 

"  A  happy  journey  to  you,"  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan, 
with  a  sigh  of  relief.  "  Surely  infinity  of  space  is  large 
enough  for  a  poor  little  projectile  to  walk  through  without 
fear.  Now,  what  is  this  portentous  globe  which  nearly 
struck  us?  " 

V.  Ill  Verne 


THE  FIRST  HALF-HOUR  257 

"  I  know,"  replied  Barbicane. 

"  Oh,  indeed !  you  know  everything." 

"  It  is,"  said  Barbicane,  "  a  simple  meteorite,  but  an  enor- 
mous one,  which  the  attraction  of  the  earth  has  retained  as 
a  satellite." 

"  Is  it  possible ! "  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan ;  "  the  earth 
then  has  two  moons  like  Neptune  ?  " 

"  Yes,  my  friend,  two  moons,  though  it  passes  generally 
for  having  only  one ;  but  this  second  moon  is  so  small,  and 
its  speed  so  great,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  cannot 
see  it.  It  was  by  noticing  disturbances  that  a  French  as- 
tronomer, M.  Petit,  was  able  to  determine  the  existence  of 
this  second  satellite  and  calculate  its  elements.  According 
to  his  observations,  this  meteorite  will  accomplish  its  revo- 
lution round  the  earth  in  three  hours  and  twenty  minutes, 
which  implies  a  wonderful  rate  of  speed." 

"Do  all  astronomers  admit  the  existence  of  this  satel- 
lite?" asked  Nicholl. 

"No,"  replied  Barbicane;  "but  if,  like  us,  they  had  met 
it,  they  could  no  longer  doubt  it.  Indeed,  I  think  that  this 
meteorite,  which,  had  it  struck  the  projectile,  would  have 
much  embarrassed  us,  will  give  us  the  means  of  deciding 
what  our  position  in  space  is." 

"  How  ?  "  said  Ardan. 

"  Because  its  distance  is  known,  and  when  we  met  it,  we 
were  exactly  4,650  miles  from  the  surface  of  the  terrestrial 
globe." 

"More  than  2,000  French  leagues,"  exclaimed  Michel 
Ardan.  "  That  beats  the  express  trains  of  the  pitiful  globe 
called  the  earth." 

"  I  should  think  so,"  replied  Nicholl,  consulting  his  chro- 
nometer; "  it  is  eleven  o'clock,  and  it  is  only  thirteen  minutes 
since  we  left  the  American  Continent." 

"  Only  thirteen  minutes?  "  said  Barbicane. 

"Yes,"  said  Nicholl:  "and  if  our  initiatory  speed  of 
12,000  yards  has  been  kept  up,  we  shall  have  made  about 
20,000  miles  in  the  hour." 

"  That  is  all  very  well,  my  friends,"  said  the  president, 
"  but  the  insoluble  question  still  remains.  Why  did  we  not 
hear  the  detonation  of  the  Columbiad?  " 

For  want  of  an  answer  the  conversation  dropped,  and 
Barbicane  began  thoughtfully  to  let  down  the  shutter  of 


258  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

the  second  side.  He  succeeded;  and  through  the  uncov- 
ered glass  the  moon  filled  the  projectile  with  a  brilliant  light. 
Nicholl,  as  an  economical  man,  put  out  the  gas,  now  use- 
less, whose  brilliancy  prevented  any  observation  of  the  in- 
terplanetary space. 

The  lunar  disc  shone  with  wonderful  purity.  Her  rays, 
no  longer  filtered  through  the  vapory  atmosphere  of  the 
terrestrial  globe,  shone  through  the  glass,  filling  the  air  in 
the  interior  of  the  projectile  with  silvery  reflections.  The 
black  curtain  of  the  firmament  in  reality  heightened  the 
moon's  brilliancy,  which  in  this  void  of  ether  unfavorable 
to  diffusion  did  not  eclipse  the  neighboring  stars.  The 
heavens,  thus  seen,  presented  quite  a  new  aspect,  and  one 
which  the  human  eye  could  never  dream  of.  One  may  con- 
ceive the  interest  with  which  these  bold  men  watched  the 
orb  of  night,  the  great  aim  of  their  journey. 

In  its  motion  the  earth's  satellite  was  insensibly  nearing 
the  zenith,  the  mathematical  point  which  it  ought  to  attain 
ninety-six  hours  later.  Her  mountains,  her  plains,  every 
projection  was  as  clearly  discernible  to  their  eyes  as  if  they 
were  observing  it  from  some  spot  upon  the  earth;  but  its 
light  was  developed  through  space  with  wonderful  inten- 
sity. The  disc  shone  like  a  platinum  mirror.  Of  the  earth 
flying  from  under  their  feet,  the  travelers  had  lost  all  recol- 
lection. 

It  was  Captain  Nicholl  who  first  recalled  their  attention 
to  the  vanishing  globe. 

"  Yes,"  said  Michel  Ardan,  "  do  not  let  us  be  ungrateful 
to  it.  Since  we  are  leaving  our  country,  let  our  last  looks 
be  directed  to  it.  I  wish  to  see  the  earth  once  more  before 
it  is  quite  hidden  from  my  eyes." 

To  satisfy  his  companions,  Barbicane  began  to  uncover 
the  window  at  the  bottom  of  the  projectile,  which  would 
allow  them  to  observe  the  earth  direct.  The  disc,  which 
the  force  of  the  projection  had  beaten  down  to  the  base, 
was  removed,  not  without  difficulty.  Its  fragments,  placed 
carefully  against  the  wall,  might  serve  again  upon  occasion. 
Then  a  circular  gap  appeared,  nineteen  inches  in  diameter, 
hollowed  out  of  the  lower  part  of  the  projectile.  A  glass 
cover,  six  inches  thick  and  strengthened  with  upper  fas- 
tenings, closed  it  tightly.  Beneath  was  fixed  an  aluminium 
plate,  held  in  place  by  bolts.     The  screws  being  undone, 


THE  FIRST  HALF-HOUR  259 

and  the  bolts  let  go,  the  plate  fell  down,  and  visible  com- 
munication was  established  between  the  interior  and  the 
exterior. 

Michel  Ardan  knelt  by  the  glass.  It  was  cloudy,  seem- 
ingly opaque. 

"  Well!  "  he  exclaimed,  "  and  the  earth?  " 
"The  earth?"  said  Barbicane.     "There  it  is." 
"What!  that  little  thread;  that  silver  crescent?" 
"  Doubtless,  Michel.     In  four  days,  when  the  moon  will 
be  full,  at  the  very  time  we  shall  reach  it,  the  earth  will  be 
new,  and  will  only  appear  to  us  as  a  slender  crescent  which 
will  soon  disappear,  and  for  some  days  will  be  enveloped  in 
utter  darkness." 

"That  the  earth?  "  repeated  Michel  Ardan,  looking  with 
all  his  eyes  at  the  thin  slip  of  his  native  planet. 

The  explanation  given  by  President  Barbicane  was  cor- 
rect. The  earth,  with  respect  to  the  projectile,  was  enter- 
ing its  last  phase.  It  was  in  its  octant,  and  showed  a 
crescent  finely  traced  on  the  dark  background  of  the  sky. 
Its  light,  rendered  bluish  by  the  thick  strata  of  the  atmos- 
phere, was  less  intense  than  that  of  the  crescent  moon,  but 
it  was  of  considerable  dimensions,  and  looked  like  an  enor- 
mous arch  stretched  across  the  firmament.  Some  parts 
brilliantly  lighted,  especially  on  its  concave  part,  showed 
the  presence  of  high  mountains,  often  disappearing  behind 
thick  spots,  which  are  never  seen  on  the  lunar  disc.  They 
were  rings  of  clouds  placed  concentrically  round  the  ter- 
restrial globe. 

Whilst  the  travelers  were  trying  to  pierce  the  profound 
darkness,  a  brilliant  cluster  of  shooting  stars  burst  upon 
their  eyes.  Hundreds  of  meteorites,  ignited  by  the  fric- 
tion of  the  atmosphere,  irradiated  the  shadow  of  the  lumi- 
nous train,  and  lined  the  cloudy  parts  of  the  disc  with  their 
fire.  At  this  period  the  earth  was  in  its  perihelion,  and  the 
month  of  December  is  so  propitious  to  these  shooting  stars, 
that  astronomers  have  counted  as  many  as  twenty-four 
thousand  in  an  hour.  But  Michel  Ardan,  disdaining  scien- 
tific reasonings,  preferred  thinking  that  the  earth  was  thus 
saluting  the  departure  of  her  three  children  with  her  most 
brilliant  fireworks. 

Indeed  this  was  all  they  saw  of  the  globe  lost  in  the 
shadow,  an  inferior  orb  of  the  solar  world,  rising  and  set- 


260  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

ting  to  the  great  planets  like  a  simple  morning  or  evening 
star!  This  globe,  where  they  had  left  all  their  affections, 
was  nothing  more  than  a  fugitive  crescent ! 

Long  did  the  three  friends  look  without  speaking, 
though  united  in  heart,  whilst  the  projectile  sped  onward 
with  an  ever-decreasing  speed.  Then  an  irresistible  drow- 
siness crept  over  their  brain.  Was  it  weariness  both  of 
body  and  mind  ?  No  doubt ;  for  after  the  over-excitement 
of  those  last  hours  passed  upon  earth,  reaction  was  inev- 
itable. 

"  Well,"  said  Nicholl,  "  since  we  must  sleep,  let  us  sleep." 

And  stretching  themselves  on  their  couches,  they  were 
all  three  soon  in  a  profound  slumber. 

But  they  had  not  forgotten  themselves  more  than  a  quar- 
ter of  an  hour,  when  Barbicane  sat  up  suddenly,  and  rous- 
ing his  companions  with  a  loud  voice,  exclaimed : 

"I  have  found  it!" 

"  What  have  you  found  ?  "  asked  Michel  Ardan,  jump- 
ing from  his  bed. 

"  The  reason  why  we  did  not  hear  the  detonation  of  the 
Columbiad." 

"And  it  is ?"  said  Nicholl. 

"  Because  our  projectile  traveled  faster  than  the  sound! " 


CHAPTER  III 

THEIR  PLACE  OF  SHELTER 

This  curious  but  certainly  correct  explanation  once 
given,  the  three  friends  returned  to  their  slumbers.  Could 
they  have  found  a  calmer  or  more  peaceful  spot  to  sleep 
in?  On  the  earth,  houses,  towns,  cottages,  and  country 
feel  every  shock  given  to  the  exterioi  of  the  globe.  On 
sea,  the  vessels  rocked  by  the  waves  are  still  in  motion;  in 
the  air,  the  balloon  oscillates  incessantly  on  the  fluid  strata 
of  divers  densities.  This  projectile  alone  floating  in  per- 
fect space,  in  the  midst  of  perfect  silence,  offered  perfect 
repose. 

Thus  the  sleep  of  our  adventurous  travelers  might  have 
been  indefinitely  prolonged,  if  an  unexpected  noise  had  not 
awakened  them  at  about  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  of 
the  2nd  of  December,  eight  hours  after  their  departure. 


THEIR  PLACE  OF  SHELTER  261 

This  noise  was  a  very  natural  barking. 

"  The  dogs !  it  is  the  dogs !  "  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan. 

"  They  are  hungry,"  said  Nicholl. 

"  By  Jove !  "  replied  Michel,  "  we  have  forgotten  them." 

"  Where  are  they?  "  asked  Barbicane. 

They  looked,  and  found  one  of  the  animals  crouched 
under  the  divan.  Terrified  and  shaken  by  the  initiatory 
shock,  it  had  remained  in  the  corner  till  its  voice  returned 
with  the  pangs  of  hunger.  It  was  the  amiable  Diana,  still 
very  confused,  who  crept  out  of  her  retreat,  though  not 
without  much  persuasion,  Michel  Ardan  encouraging  her 
with  most  gracious  words. 

"Come,  Diana,"  said  he;  "come,  my  girl!  thou  whose 
destiny  will  be  marked  in  the  cynegetic  annals;  thou  whom 
the  pagans  would  have  given  as  companion  to  the  god 
Anubis,  and  Christians  as  friend  to  St.  Roch;  thou  who 
art  rushing  into  interplanetary  space,  and  wilt  perhaps  be 
the  Eve  of  all  Selenite  dogs!  come,  Diana,  come  here." 

Diana,  flattered  or  not,  advanced  by  degrees,  uttering 
plaintive  cries. 

"  Good,"  said  Barbicane ;  "  I  see  Eve,  but  where  is 
Adam?" 

"Adam?"  replied  Michel;  "Adam  cannot  be  far  off; 
he  is  there  somewhere;  we  must  call  him.  Satellite!  here, 
Satellite!" 

But  Satellite  did  not  appear.  Diana  would  not  leave  off 
howling.  They  found,  however,  that  she  was  not  bruised, 
and  they  gave  her  a  pie,  which  silenced  her  complaints. 
As  to  Satellite,  he  seemed  quite  lost.  They  had  to  hunt  a 
long  time  before  finding  him  in  one  of  the  upper  compart- 
ments of  the  projectile,  whither  some  unaccountable  shock 
must  have  violently  hurled  him.  The  poor  beast,  much 
hurt,  was  in  a  piteous  state. 

"  The  devil !  "  said  Michel. 

They  brought  the  unfortunate  dog  down  with  great  care. 
Its  skull  had  been  broken  against  the  roof,  and  it  seemed 
unlikely  that  he  could  recover  from  such  a  shock.  Mean- 
while, he  was  stretched  comfortably  on  a  cushion.  Once 
there,  he  heaved  a  sigh. 

"  We  will  take  care  of  you,"  said  Michel ;  "  we  are  re- 
sponsible for  your  existence.  I  would  rather  lose  an  arm 
than  a  paw  of  my  poor  Satellite." 


262  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

Saying  which,  he  offered  some  water  to  the  wounded 
dog,  who  swallowed  it  with  avidity. 

This  attention  paid,  the  travelers  watched  the  earth  and 
the  moon  attentively.  The  earth  was  now  only  discernible 
by  a  cloudy  disc  ending  in  a  crescent,  rather  more  con- 
tracted than  that  of  the  previous  evening;  but  its  expanse 
was  still  enormous,  compared  with  that  of  the  moon,  which 
was  approaching  nearer  and  nearer  to  a  perfect  circle. 

"  By  Jove !  "  said  Michel  Ardan,  "  I  am  really  sorry  that 
we  did  not  start  when  the  earth  was  full,  that  is  to  say, 
when  our  globe  was  in  opposition  to  the  sun." 

"Why?"  asked  Nicholl. 

"  Because  we  should  have  seen  our  continents  and  seas 
in  a  new  light, — the  first  resplendent  under  the  solar  rays, 
the  latter  cloudy  as  represented  on  some  maps  of  the  world. 
I  should  like  to  have  seen  those  poles  of  the  earth  on  which 
the  eye  of  man  has  never  yet  rested." 

"I  dare  say,"  replied  Barbicane;  "but  if  the  earth  had 
been  full,  the  moon  would  have  been  new;  that  is  to  say, 
invisible,  because  of  the  rays  of  the  sun.  It  is  better  for 
us  to  see  the  destination  we  wish  to  reach,  than  the  point 
of  departure." 

"You  are  right,  Barbicane,"  replied  Captain  Nicholl; 
"  and,  besides,  when  we  have  reached  the  moon,  we  shall 
have  time  during  the  long  lunar  nights  to  consider  at  our 
leisure  the  globe  on  which  our  likenesses  swarm." 

"Our  likenesses,"  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan;  "they  are 
no  more  our  likenesses  than  the  Selenites  are!  We  in- 
habit a  new  world,  peopled  by  ourselves — the  projectile! 
I  am  Barbicane's  likeness,  and  Barbicane  is  Nicholl's.  Be- 
yond us,  around  us,  human  nature  is  at  an  end,  and  we  are 
the  only  population  of  this  microcosm  until  we  become  pure 
Selenites." 

"  In  about  eighty-eight  hours,"  replied  the  captain. 

"  Which  means  to  say?  "  asked  Michel  Ardan. 

"  That  it  is  half  past  eight,"  replied  Nicholl. 

"Very  well,"  retorted  Michel;  "then  it  is  impossible 
for  me  to  find  even  the  shadow  of  a  reason  why  we  should 
not  go  to  breakfast." 

Indeed  the  inhabitants  of  the  new  star  could  not  live 
without  eating,  and  their  stomachs  were  suffering  from  the 
imperious  laws  of  hunger.     Michel  Ardan,  as  a  French- 


THEIR  PLACE  OF  SHELTER  263. 

man,  was  declared  chief  cook,  an  important  function,  whicrJ 
raised  no  rival.  The  gas  gave  sufficient  heat  for  the  culin- 
ary apparatus,  and  the  provision-box  furnished  the  ele- 
ments for  this  first  feast. 

The  breakfast  began  with  three  bowls  of  excellent  soup, 
thanks  to  the  liquefaction  in  hot  water  of  those  precious 
cakes  of  Liebig,  prepared  from  the  best  parts  of  the  rumi- 
nants of  the  Pampas.  To  the  soup  succeeded  some  beef- 
steaks, compressed  by  an  hydraulic  press,  as  tender  and 
succulent  as  if  brought  straight  from  the  kitchen  of  an 
English  eating-house.  Michel,  who  was  imaginative,  main- 
tained that  they  were  even  "  red." 

Preserved  vegetables  ("  fresher  than  nature,"  said  the 
amiable  Michel)  succeeded  the  dish  of  meat;  and  was  fol- 
lowed by  some  cups  of  tea  with  bread  and  butter,  after 
the  American  fashion. 

The  beverage  was  declared  exquisite,  and  was  due  to 
the  infusion  of  the  choicest  leaves,  of  which  the  Emperor 
of  Russia  had  given  some  chests  for  the  benefit  of  the  trav- 
elers. 

And  lastly,  to  crown  the  repast,  Ardan  brought  out  a 
fine  bottle  of  Nuits,  which  was  found  "  by  chance  "  in  the 
provision-box.  The  three  friends  drank  to  the  union  of 
the  earth  and  her  satellite. 

And,  as  if  he  had  not  already  done  enough  for  the  gen- 
erous wine  which  he  had  distilled  on  the  slopes  of  Bur- 
gundy, the  sun  chose  to  be  of  the  party.  At  this  moment 
the  projectile  emerged  from  the  conical  shadow  cast  by  the 
terrestrial  globe,  and  the  rays  of  the  radiant  orb  struck  the 
lower  disc  of  the  projectile  direct,  occasioned  by  the  angle 
which  the  moon's  orbit  makes  with  that  of  the  earth. 

"  The  sun !  "  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan. 

"  No  doubt,"  replied  Barbicane ;  "  I  expected  it." 

"  But,"  said  Michel,  "  the  conical  shadow  which  the  earth' 
leaves  in  space  extends  beyond  the  moon  ?  " 

"  Far  beyond  it,  if  the  atmospheric  refraction  is  not 
taken  into  consideration,"  said  Barbicane.  "  But  when 
the  moon  is  enveloped  in  this  shadow,  it  is  because  the  cen- 
ters of  the  three  stars,  the  sun,  the  earth,  and  the  moon, 
are  all  in  one  and  the  same  straight  line.  Then  the  nodes 
coincide  with  the  phases  of  the  moon,  and  there  is  an  eclipse. 
If  we  had  started  when  there  was  an  eclipse  of  the  moon, 


264  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

all  our  passage  would  have  been  in  the  shadow,  which 
would  have  been  a  pity." 

"Why?" 

"  Because,  though  we  are  floating  in  space,  our  projec- 
tile, bathed  in  the  solar  rays,  will  receive  their  light  and 
heat.  It  economizes  the  gas,  which  is  in  every  respect  a 
good  economy." 

Indeed,  under  these  rays  which  no  atmosphere  can  tem- 
per, either  in  temperature  or  brilliancy,  the  projectile  grew 
warm  and  bright,  as  if  it  had  passed  suddenly  from  winter 
to  summer.  The  moon  above,  the  sun  beneath,  were  in- 
undating it  with  their  fire. 

"  It  is  pleasant  here,"  said  Nicholl. 

"  I  should  think  so,"  said  Michel  Ardan.  "  With  a  little 
earth  spread  on  our  aluminium  planet  we  should  have  green 
peas  in  twenty-four  hours.  I  have  but  one  fear,  which  is 
that  the  walls  of  the  projectile  might  melt." 

"Calm  yourself,  my  worthy  friend,"  replied  Barbicane; 
"  the  projectile  withstood  a  very  much  higher  temperature 
than  this  as  it  slid  through  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere. 
I  .should  not  be  surprised  if  it  did  not  look  like  a  meteor  on 
fire  to  the  eyes  of  the  spectators  in  Florida." 

"  But  then  Joseph  T.  Maston  will  think  we  are  roasted !  " 

"  What  astonishes  me,"  said  Barbicane,  "  is  that  we  have 
not  been.     That  was  a  danger  we  had  not  provided  for." 

"  I  feared  it,"  said  Nicholl  simply. 

"  And  you  never  mentioned  it,  my  sublime  captain,"  ex- 
claimed Michel  Ardan,  clasping  his  friend's  hand. 

Barbicane  now  began  to  settle  himself  in  the  projectile 
as  if  he  was  never  to  leave  it.  One  must  remember  that 
this  aerial  car  had  a  base  with  a  superficies  of  fifty-four 
square  feet.  Its  height  to  the  roof  was  twelve  feet.  Care- 
fully laid  out  in  the  inside,  and  little  encumbered  by  instru- 
ments and  traveling  utensils  which  each  had  their  particular 
place,  it  left  the  three  travelers  a  certain  freedom  of  move- 
ment. The  thick  window  inserted  in  the  bottom  could  bear 
any  amount  of  weight,  and  Barbicane  and  his  companions 
walked  upon  it  as  if  it  were  solid  plank;  but  the  sun  strik- 
ing it  directly  with  its  rays  lit  the  interior  of  the  projectile 
from  beneath,  thus  producing  singular  effects  of  light. 

They  began  by  investigating  the  state  of  their  store  of 
water  and  provisions,  neither  of  which  had  suffered,  thanks 


THEIR  PLACE  OF  SHELTER  265 

to  the  care  taken  to  deaden  the  shock.  Their  provisions 
were  abundant,  and  plentiful  enough  to  last  the  three  trav- 
elers for  more  than  a  year.  Barbicane  wished  to  be  cau- 
tious, in  case  the  projectile  should  land  on  a  part  of  the 
moon  which  was  utterly  barren.  As  to  water  and  the  reserve 
of  brandy,  which  consisted  of  fifty  gallons,  there  was  only 
enough  for  two  months ;  but  according  to  the  last  observa- 
tions of  astronomers,  the  moon  had  a  low,  dense,  and  thick 
atmosphere,  at  least  in  the  deep  valleys,  and  there  springs 
and  streams  could  not  fail.  Thus,  during  their  passage, 
and  for  the  first  year  of  their  settlement  on  the  lunar  con- 
tinent, these  adventurous  explorers  would  suffer  neither 
hunger  nor  thirst. 

Now  about  the  air  in  the  projectile.  There,  too,  they 
were  secure.  Reiset  and  Regnaut's  apparatus,  intended 
for  the  production  of  oxygen,  was  supplied  with  chlorate 
of  potash  for  two  months.  They  necessarily  consumed  a 
certain  quantity  of  gas,  for  they  were  obliged  to  keep  the 
producing  substance  at  a  temperature  of  above  400°.  But 
there  again  they  were  all  safe.  The  apparatus  only  wanted 
a  little  care.  But  it  was  not  enough  to  renew  the  oxygen ; 
they  must  absorb  the  carbonic  acid  produced  by  expiration. 
During  the  last  twelve  hours  the  atmosphere  of  the  projec- 
tile had  become  charged  with  this  deleterious  gas.  Nicholl 
discovered  the  state  of  the  air  by  observing  Diana  panting 
painfully.  The  carbonic  acid,  by  a  phenomenon  similar  to 
that  produced  in  the  famous  Grotto  del  Cane,  had  collected 
atthe  bottom  of  the  projectile  owing  to  its  weight.  Poor 
Diana,  with  her  head  low,  would  suffer  before  her  masters 
from  the  presence  of  this  gas.  But  Captain  Nicholl  has- 
tened to  remedy  this  state  of  things,  by  placing  on  the 
floor  several  receivers  containing  caustic  potash  which  he 
shook  about  for  a  time,  and  this  substance,  greedy  of  car- 
bonic acid,  soon  completely  absorbed  it,  thus  purifying 
the  air. 

An  inventory  of  instruments  was  then  begun.  The 
thermometers  and  barometers  had  resisted,  all  but  one  mini- 
mum thermometer,  the  glass  of  which  was  broken.  An 
excellent  aneroid  was  drawn  from  the  wadded  box  which 
contained  it  and  hung  on  the  wall.  Of  course  it  was  only 
affected  by  and  marked  the  pressure  of  the  air  inside  the 
projectile,  but  it  also  showed  the  quantity  of  moisture  which 


266  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

it  contained.  At  that  moment  its  needle  oscillated  between 
25.24  and  25.08. 

It  was  fine  weather. 

Barbicane  had  also  brought  several  compasses,  which  he 
found  intact.  One  must  understand  that  under  present 
conditions  their  needles  were  acting  wildly,  that  is,  with- 
out any  constant  direction.  Indeed,  at  the  distance  they 
were  from  the  earth,  the  magnetic  pole  could  have  no  per- 
ceptible action  upon  the  apparatus;  but  the  box  placed  on 
the  lunar  disc  might  perhaps  exhibit  some  strange  phe- 
nomena. In  any  case  it  would  be  interesting  to  see  whether 
the  earth's  satellite  submitted  like  herself  to  its  magnetic 
influence. 

A  hypsometer  to  measure  the  height  of  the  lunar  moun- 
tains, a  sextant  to  take  the  height  of  the  sun,  glasses  which 
would  be  useful  as  they  neared  the  moon,  all  these  instru- 
ments were  carefully  looked  over,  and  pronounced  good  in 
spite  of  the  violent  shock. 

As  to  the  pickaxes  and  different  tools  which  were  Nich- 
oll's  especial  choice;  as  to  the  sacks  of  different  kinds  of 
grain  and  shrubs  which  Michel  Ardan  hoped  to  transplant 
into  Selenite  ground,  they  were  stowed  away  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  projectile.  There  was  a  sort  of  granary  there, 
loaded  with  things  which  the  extravagant  Frenchman  had 
heaped  up.  What  they  were  no  one  knew,  and  the  good- 
tempered  fellow  did  not  explain.  Now  and  then  he  climbed 
up  by  cramp-irons  riveted  to  the  walls,  but  kept  the  inspec- 
tion to  himself.  He  arranged  and  rearranged,  he  plunged 
his  hand  rapidly  into  certain  mysterious  boxes,  singing  in 
one  of  the  falsest  of  voices  an  old  French  refrain  to  enliven 
the  situation. 

Barbicane  observed  with  some  interest  that  his  guns  and 
other  arms  had  not  been  damaged.  These  were  important, 
because,  heavily  loaded,  they  were  to  help  to  lessen  the  fall 
of  the  projectile,  when  drawn  by  the  lunar  attraction  (after 
having  passed  the  point  of  neutral  attraction)  on  to  the 
moon's  surface;  a  fall  which  ought  to  be  six  times  less  rapid 
than  it  would  have  been  on  the  earth's  surface,  thanks  to 
the  difference  of  bulk.  The  inspection  ended  with  gen- 
eral satisfaction,  when  each  returned  to  watch  space 
through  the  side  windows  and  the  lower  glass  coverlid. 

There  was  the  same  view.    The  whole  extent  of  the 


THEIR  PLACE  OF  SHELTER  267 

celestial  sphere  swarmed  with  stars  and  constellations  of 
wonderful  purity,  enough  to  drive  an  astronomer  out  of 
his  mind !  On  one  side  the  sun,  like  the  mouth  of  a  lighted 
oven,  a  dazzling  disc  without  a  halo,  standing  out  on  the 
dark  background  of  the  sky !  On  the  other,  the  moon  re- 
turning its  fire  by  reflection,  and  apparently  motionless  in 
the  midst  of  the  starry  world.  Then,  a  large  spot  seem- 
ingly nailed  to  the  firmament,  bordered  by  a  silvery  cord; 
it  was  the  earth!  Here  and  there  nebulous  masses  like 
large  flakes  of  starry  snow;  and  from  the  zenith  to  the 
nadir,  an  immense  ring  formed  by  an  impalpable  dust  of 
stars,  the  "  Milky  Way,"  in  the  midst  of  which  the  sun 
ranks  only  as  a  star  of  the  fourth  magnitude.  The  ob- 
servers could  not  take  their  eyes  from  this  novel  spectacle, 
of  which  no  description  could  give  an  adequate  idea.  What 
reflections  it  suggested !  What  emotions  hitherto  unknown 
awoke  in  their  souls!  Barbicane  wished  to  begin  the  rela- 
tion of  his  journey  while  under  its  first  impressions,  and 
hour  after  hour  took  notes  of  all  facts  happening  in  the  be- 
ginning of  the  enterprise.  He  wrote  quietly,  with  his  large 
square  writing,  in  a  business-like  style. 

During  this  time  Nicholl,  the  calculator,  looked  over  the 
minutes  of  their  passage,  and  worked  out  figures  with  un- 
paralleled dexterity.  Michel  Ardan  chatted  first  with  Bar- 
bicane, who  did  not  answer  him,  and  then  with  Nicholl,  who 
did  not  hear  him,  with  Diana,  who  understood  none  of  his 
theories,  and  lastly  with  himself,  questioning  and  answer- 
ing, going  and  coming,  busy  with  a  thousand  details;  at 
one  time  bent  over  the  lower  glass,  at  another  roosting  in 
the  heights  of  the  projectile,  and  always  singing.  In  this 
microcosm  he  represented  French  loquacity  and  excitability, 
and  we  beg  you  to  believe  that  they  were  well  represented. 
The  day,  or  rather  (for  the  expression  is  not  correct)  the 
lapse  of  twelve  hours,  which  forms  a  day  upon  earth,  closed 
with  a  plentiful  supper  carefully  prepared.  No  accident 
of  any  nature  had  yet  happened  to  shake  the  travelers'  con- 
fidence; so,  full  of  hope,  already  sure  of  success,  they  slept 
peacefully,  whilst  the  projectile  under  a  uniformly  decreas- 
ing speed  was  crossing  the  sky. 


CHAPTER  IV 

A   LITTLE   ALGEBRA 

The  night  passed  without  incident.  The  word  "  night," 
however,  is  scarcely  applicable. 

The  position  of  the  projectile  with  regard  to  the  sun  did 
not  change.  Astronomically,  it  was  daylight  on  the  lower 
part,  and  night  on  the  upper ;  so  when  during  this  narrative 
these  words  are  used,  they  represent  the  lapse  of  time  be- 
tween the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun  upon  the  earth. 

The  travelers'  sleep  was  rendered  more  peaceful  by  the 
projectile's  excessive  speed,  for  it  seemed  absolutely  mo- 
tionless. Not  a  motion  betrayed  its  onward  course  through 
space.  The  rate  of  progress,  however  rapid  it  might  be, 
cannot  produce  any  sensible  effect  on  the  human  frame 
when  it  takes  place  in  a  vacuum,  or  when  the  mass  of  air 
circulates  with  the  body  which  is  carried  with  it.  What 
inhabitant  of  the  earth  perceives  its  speed,  which,  however, 
is  at  the  rate  of  68,000  miles  per  hour?  Motion  under 
such  conditions  is  "  felt"  no  more  than  repose;  and  when 
a  body  is  in  repose  it  will  remain  so  as  long  as  no  strange 
force  displaces  it;  if  moving,  it  will  not  stop  unless  an  ob- 
stacle comes  in  its  way.  This  indifference  to  motion  or 
repose  is  called  inertia. 

Barbicane  and  his  companions  might  have  believed  them- 
selves perfectly  stationary,  being  shut  up  in  the  projectile; 
indeed,  the  effect  would  have  been  the  same  if  they  had 
beep  on  the  outside  of  it.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  moon, 
which  was  increasing  above  them,  they  might  have  sworn 
that  they  were  floating  in  complete  stagnation. 

That  morning^  the  3rd  of  December,  the  travelers  were 
awakened  by  a  joyous  but  unexpected  noise;  it  was  the 
crowing  of  a  cock  which  sounded  through  the  car.  Michel 
Ardan,  who  was  the  first  on  his  feet,  climbed  to  the  top 
of  the  projectile,  and  shutting  a  box,  the  lid  of  which  was 
partly  open,  said  in  a  low  voice,  "Will  you  hold  your 
tongue?     That  creature  will  spoil  my  design!  " 

But  Nicholl  and  Barbicane  were  awake. 

"Acock!"  said  Nicholl. 

"Why  no,_  my  friends,"  Michel  answered  quickly;  "it 
was  I  who  wished  to  awake  you  by  this  rural  sound."  So 
saying,  he  gave  vent  to  a  splendid  cock-a-doodledoo,  which 
would  have  done  honor  to  the  proudest  of  poultry  yards. 

268 


A  LITTLE  ALGEBRA  269 

The  two  American  could  not  help  laughing. 

"  Fine  talent  that,"  said  Nicholl,  looking  suspiciously  at 
his  companion. 

"  Yes,"  said  Michel ;  "  a  joke  in  my  country.  It  is  very 
Gallic;  they  play  the  cock  so  in  the  best  society." 

Then  turning  the  conversation : 

"  Barbicane,  do  you  know  what  I  have  been  thinking 
of  all  night?  " 

"  No,"  answered  the  president. 

"Of  our  Cambridge  friends.  You  have  already  re- 
marked that  I  am  an  ignoramus  in  mathematical  subjects, 
and  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  find  out  how  the  savants  of 
the  Observatory  were  able  to  calculate  what  initiatory  speed 
the  projectile  ought  to  have  on  leaving  the  Columbiad  in 
order  to  attain  the  moon." 

"  You  mean  to  say,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  to  attain  that 
neutral  point  where  the  terrestrial  and  lunar  attractions  are 
equal;  for,  starting  from  that  point,  situated  about  nine- 
tenths  of  the  distance  traveled  over,  the  projectile  would 
simply  fall  upon  the  moon,  on  account  of  its  weight." 

"  So  be  it,"  said  Michel ;  "  but,  once  more ;  how  could 
they  calculate  the  initiatory  speed  ?  " 

"  Nothing  can  be  easier,"  replied  Barbicane. 

"And  you  know  how  to  make  that  calculation?"  asked 
Michel  Ardan. 

"  Perfectly.  Nicholl  and  I  would  have  made  it,  if  the 
Observatory  had  not  saved  us  the  trouble." 

"Very  well,  old  Barbicane,"  replied  Michel;  "they 
might  have  cut  off  my  head,  beginning  at  my  feet,  before 
they  could  have  made  me  solve  that  problem." 

"Because  you  do  not  know  algebra,"  answered  Barbi- 
cane quietly. 

"Ah,  there  you  are,  you  eaters  of  xx;  you  think  you 
have  said  all  when  you  have  said  '  Algebra.'  " 

"  Michel,"  said  Barbicane,  "  can  you  use  a  forge  with- 
out a  hammer,  or  plow  without  a  plow-share?  " 

"  Hardly." 

"  Well,  algebra  is  a  tool,  like  the  plow  or  the  hammer, 
and  a  good  tool  to  those  who  know  how  to  use  it." 

"Seriously?" 

"Quite  seriously." 

"  And  can  you  use  that  tool  in  my  presence?  " 


2^0  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"  If  it  will  interest  you." 

"  And  show  me  how  they  calculated  the  initiatory  speed 
of  our  car?  " 

"Yes,  my  worthy  friend;  taking  into  consideration  all 
the  elements  of  the  problem,  the  distance  from  the  center 
of  the  earth  to  the  center  of  the  moon,  of  the  radius  of  the 
earth,  of  its  bulk,  and  of  the  bulk  of  the  moon,  1  can  tell 
exactly  what  ought  to  be  the  initiatory  speed  of  the  projec- 
tile, and  that  by  a  simple  formula." 

"  Let  us  see." 

"You  shall  see  it;  only  I  shall  not  give  you  the  real 
course  drawn  by  the  projectile  between  the  moon  and  the 
earth  in  considering  their  motion  round  the  sun.  No,  I 
shall  consider  these  two  orbs  as  perfectly  motionless,  which 
will  answer  all  our  purpose." 

"And  why?" 

"Because  it  will  be  trying  to  solve  the  problem  called 
'  the  problem  of  the  three  bodies,'  for  which  the  integral 
calculus  is  not  yet  far  enough  advanced." 

"Then,"  said  Michel  Ardan,  in  his  sly  tone,  "mathe- 
matics have  not  said  their  last  word?  " 

"  Certainly  not,"  replied  Barbicane. 

"Well,  perhaps  the  Selenites  have  carried  the  integral 
calculus  farther  than  you  have;  and,  by  the  by,  what  is  this 
'  integral  calculus  '  ?  " 

"  It  is  a  calculation  the  converse  of  the  differential,"  re- 
plied Barbicane  seriously. 

"  Much  obliged ;  it  is  all  very  clear,  no  doubt." 

"  And  now,"  continued  Barbicane,  "  a  slip  of  paper  and 
a  bit  of  pencil,  and  before  a  half  hour  is  over  I  will  have 
found  the  required  formula." 

Half  an  hour  had  not  elapsed  before  Barbicane,  raising 
his  head,  showed  Michel  Ardan  a  page  covered  with  alge- 
braical signs,  in  which  the  general  formula  for  the  solu- 
tion was  contained. 

"  Well,  and  does  Nicholl  understand  what  that  means  ?  ' 

"Of  course,  Michel,"  replied  the  captain.  "All  these 
signs,  which  seem  cabalistic  to  you,  form  the  plainest,  the 
clearest,  and  the  most  logical  language  to  those  who  know 
how  to  read  it." 

"And  you  pretend,  Nicholl,"  asked  Michel,  ''that  by 
means  of  these  hieroglyphics,  more  incomprehensible  than 


A  LITTLE  ALGEBRA  271 

the  Egyptian  Ibis,  you  can  find  what  initiatory  speed  it 
was  necessary  to  give  to  the  projectile?  " 

"  Incontestably,"  replied  Nicholl;  "and  even  by  this 
same  formula  1  can  always  tell  you  its  speed  at  any  point 
of  its  transit." 

"  On  your  word?  " 

"  On  my  word." 

"  Then  you  are  as  cunning  as  our  president." 

"  No,  Michel ;  the  difficult  part  is  what  Barbicane  has 
done ;  that  is,  to  get  an  equation  which  shall  satisfy  the  con- 
ditions of  the  problem.  The  remainder  is  only  a  question 
of  arithmetic,  requiring  merely  the  knowledge  of  the  four 
rules." 

"  That  is  something ! "  replied  Michel  Ardan,  who  for 
his  life  could  not  do  addition  right,  and  who  defined  the 
rule  as  a  Chinese  puzzle,  which  allowed  one  to  obtain  all 
sorts  of  totals. 

"  The  expression  v  zero,  which  you  see  in  that  equation, 
is  the  speed  which  the  projectile  will  have  on  leaving  the 
atmosphere." 

"Just  so,"  said  Nicholl;  "it  is  from  that  point  that 
we  must  calculate  the  velocity,  since  we  know  already  that 
the  velocity  at  departure  was  exactly  one  and  a  half  times 
more  than  on  leaving  the  atmosphere." 

"  I  understand  no  more,"  said  Michel. 

"  It  is  a  very  simple  calculation,"  said  Barbicane. 

"  Not  as  simple  as  I  am,"  retorted  Michel. 

"  That  means,  that  when  our  projectile  reached  the  lim- 
its, of  the  terrestrial  atmosphere  it  had  already  lost  one- 
third  of  its  initiatory  speed." 

"As  much  as  that?  " 

"  Yes,  my  friend ;  merely  by  friction  against  the  atmos- 
pheric strata.  You  understand  that  the  faster  it  goes  the 
more  resistance  it  meets  with  from  the  air." 

"That  I  admit,"  answered  Michel;  "and  I  understand 
it,  although  your  x's  and  zeros,  and  algebraic  formulae, 
are  rattling  in  my  head  like  nails  in  a  bag." 

"  First  effects  of  algebra,"  replied  Barbicane;  "  and  now, 
to  finish,  we  are  going  to  prove  the  given  number  of  these 
different  expressions,  that  is.  work  out  their  value." 

"  Finish  me !  "  replied  Michel. 

Barbicane  took  the  paper,  and  began  again  to  make  his 


21$  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

calculations  with  great  rapidity.  Nicholl  looked  over  and 
greedily  read  the  work  as  it  proceeded. 

"  That's  it !  that's  it !  "  at  last  he  cried. 

"  Is  it  clear  ?  "  asked  Barbicane. 

"  It  is  written  in  letters  of  fire,"  said  Nicholl. 

"  Wonderful  fellows !  "  muttered  Ardan. 

"Do  you  understand  it  at  last?"  asked  Barbicane. 

"Do  I  understand  it?"  cried  Ardan;  "my  head  is  split- 
ting with  it." 

"  And  now,"  said  Nicholl,  "  to  find  out  the  speed  of  the 
projectile  when  it  left  the  atmosphere  we  have  only  to  cal- 
culate that." 

The  captain,  as  a  practical  man  equal  to  all  difficulties, 
began  to  write  with  frightful  rapidity.  Divisions  and  mul- 
tiplications grew  under  his  fingers;  the  figures  were  like 
hail  on  the  white  page.  Barbicane  watched  him,  whilst 
Michel  Ardan  nursed  a  growing  headache  with  both  hands. 

"Very  well?"  asked  Barbicane,  after  some  minutes'  si- 
lence. 

"Well!"  replied  Nicholl;  "every  calculation  made,  v 
zero,  that  is  to  say,  the  speed  necessary  for  the  projectile 
on  leaving  the  atmosphere,  to  enable  it  to  reach  the  equal 
point  of  attraction,  ought  to  be " 

"  Yes?  "  said  Barbicane. 

"  Twelve  thousand  yards." 

"  What!  "  exclaimed  Barbicane,  starting;  "you  say " 

"  Twelve  thousand  yards." 

"  The  devil !  "  cried  the  president,  making  a  gesture  of 
despair. 

"  What  is  the  matter?  "  asked  Michel  Ardan,  much  sur- 
prised. 

"  What  is  the  matter !  why,  if  at  this  moment  our  speed 
had  already  diminished  one-third  by  friction,  the  initiatory 
speed  ought  to  have  been " 

"  Seventeen  thousand  yards." 

"  And  the  Cambridge  Observatory  declared  that  12,000 
yards  was  enough  at  starting;  and  our  projectile,  which 
only  started  with  that  speed " 

"Well?"  asked  Nicholl. 

"  Well,  it  will  not  be  enough." 

"  Good." 

"  We  shall  not  be  able  to  reach  the  neutral  point." 

y.  Ill  Verne 


A  LITTLE  ALGEBRA  273 

"  The  deuce! " 

"  We  shall  not  even  get  half  way." 

"In  the  name  of  the  projectile!"  exclaimed  Michel  Ar- 
dan,  jumping  as  if  it  was  already  on  the  point  of  striking 
the  terrestrial  globe. 

"  And  we  shall  fall  back  upon  the  earth ! " 

CHAPTER  V 

THE  COLD  OF  SPACE 

This  revelation  came  like  a  thunderbolt.  Who  could 
have  expected  such  an  error  in  calculation?  Barbicane 
would  not  believe  it.  Nicholl  revised  his  figures;  they 
were  exact.  As  to  the  formula  which  had  determined 
them,  they  could  not  suspect  its  truth;  it  was  evident  that 
an  initiatory  velocity  of  17,000  yards  in  the  first  second 
was  necessary  to  enable  them  to  reach  the  neutral  point. 

The  three  friends  looked  at  each  other  silently.  There 
was  no  thought  of  breakfast.  Barbicane,  with  clenched 
teeth,  knitted  brows,  and  hands  clasped  convulsively,  was 
watching  through  the  window.  Nicholl  had  crossed  his 
arms,  and  was  examining  his  calculations.  Michel  Ardan 
was  muttering: 

"That  is  just  like  those  scientific  men:  they  never  do 
anything  else.  I  would  give  twenty  pistoles  if  we  could 
fall  upon  the  Cambridge  Observatory  and  crush  it,  together 
with  the  whole  lot  of  dabblers  in  figures  which  it  contains." 

Suddenly  a  thought  struck  the  captain,  which  he  at  once 
communicated  to  Barbicane. 

"Ah!"  said  he;  "it  is  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning; 
we  have  already  been  gone  thirty-two  hours;  more  than 
half  our  passage  is  over,  and  we  are  not  falling  that  I  am 
aware  of." 

Barbicane  did  not  answer,  but,  after  a  rapid  glance  at 
the  captain,  took  a  pair  of  compasses  wherewith  to  measure 
the  angular  distance  of  the  terrestrial  globe ;  then  from  the 
lower  window  he  took  an  exact  observation,  and  noticed 
that  the  projectile  was  apparently  stationary.  Then  rising 
and  wiping  his  forehead,  on  which  large  drops  of  perspira- 
tion were  standing,  he  put  some  figures  on  paper.  Nicholl 
understood  that  the  president  was  deducting  from  the  ter- 


274  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

restrial  diameter  the  projectile's  distance  from  the  earth. 
He  watched  him  anxiously. 

"  No,"  exclaimed  Barbicane,  after  some  moments,  "  no, 
we  are  not  falling!  no,  we  are  already  more  than  50,000 
leagues  from  the  earth.  We  have  passed  the  point  at 
which  the  projectile  would  have  stopped  if  its  speed  had 
only  been  12,000  yards  at  starting.  We  are  still  go- 
ing up." 

"  That  is  evident,"  replied  Nicholl ;  "  and  we  must  con- 
clude that  our  initial  speed,  under  the  power  of  the  400,000 
pounds  of  gun-cotton,  must  have  exceeded  the  required 
12,000  yards.  Now  I  can  understand  how,  after  thirteen 
minutes  only,  we  met  the  second  satellite,  which  gravitates 
round  the  earth  at  more  than  2,000  leagues'  distance." 

"  And  this  explanation  is  the  more  probable,"  added 
Barbicane,  "because,  in  throwing  off  the  water  enclosed 
between  its  partition-breaks,  the  projectile  found  itself 
lightened  of  a  considerable  weight." 

"  Just  so,"  said  Nicholl. 

"  Ah,  my  brave  Nicholl,  we  are  saved !  " 

"  Very  well,  then,"  said  Michel  Ardan,  quietly ;  "  as  we 
are  safe,  let  us  have  breakfast." 

Nicholl  was  not  mistaken.  The  initial  speed  had  been, 
very  fortunately,  much  above  that  estimated  by  the  Cam- 
bridge Observatory;  but  the  Cambridge  Observatory  had 
nevertheless  made  a  mistake. 

The  travelers,  recovered  from  this  false  alarm,  break- 
fasted merrily.  If  they  ate  a  great  deal,  they  talked  more. 
Their  confidence  was  greater  after  than  before  "  the  inci- 
dent of  the  algebra." 

"Why  should  we  not  succeed?"  said  Michel  Ardan; 
"why  should  we  not  arrive  safely?  We  are  launched;  we 
have  no  obstacle  before  us,  no  stones  in  our  way;  the  road 
is  open,  more  so  than  that  of  a  ship  battling  with  the  sea; 
more  open  than  that  of  a  balloon  battling  with  the  wind ; 
and  if  a  ship  can  reach  its  destination,  a  balloon  go  where 
it  pleases,  why  cannot  our  projectile  attain  its  end  and  aim?  9 

"  It  will  attain  it,"  said  Barbicane. 

"  If  only  to  do  honor  to  the  Americans,"  added  Michel 
Ardan,  "the  only  people  who  could  bring  such  an  enter- 
prise to  a  happy  termination,  and  the  only  one  which  could 
produce  a  President  Barbicane.    Ah,  now  we  are  no  longer 


THE  COLD  OF  SPACE  275 

uneasy,  what  will  become  of  us?  We  shall  get  right  royally 
weary." 

Barbicane  and  Nicholl  made  a  gesture  of  denial. 

"  But  I  have  provided  for  the  contingency,  my  friends," 
replied  Michel;  "you  have  only  to  speak,  and  I  have  chess, 
draughts,  cards,  and  dominoes  at  your  disposal;  nothing 
is  wanting  but  a  billiard  table." 

"What!"  exclaimed  Barbicane;  "you  brought  away 
such  trifles?" 

"  Certainly,"  replied  Michel,  "  and  not  only  to  distract 
ourselves,  but  also  with  the  laudable  intention  of  endowing 
the  Selenite  smoking  divans  with  them." 

"  My  friend,"  said  Barbicane,  "  if  the  moon  is  inhab- 
ited, its  inhabitants  must  have  appeared  some  thousands 
of  years  before  those  of  the  earth,  for  we  cannot  doubt 
that  their  star  is  much  older  than  ours.  If  then  these 
Selenites  have  existed  there  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
years,  and  if  their  brain  is  of  the  same  organization  as  the 
human  brain,  they  have  already  invented  all  that  we  have 
invented,  and  even  what  we  may  invent  in  future  ages. 
They  have  nothing  to  learn  from  us,  and  we  have  every- 
thing to  learn  from  them." 

"What!"  said  Michel;  "you  believe  that  they  have 
artists  like  Phidias,  Michel  Angelo,  or  Raphael  ?  " 

"Yes." 

"Poets  like  Homer,  Virgil,  Milton,  Lamartine,  and 
Hugo?  " 

"  I  am  sure  of  it." 

"  Philosophers  like  Plato,  Aristotle,  Descartes,  Kant  ?  " 

"  I  have  no  doubt  of  it." 

"Scientific  men  like  Archimedes,  Euclid,  Pascal,  New- 
ton?" 

"  I  could  swear  it." 

"  Comic  writers  like  Arnal,  and  photographers  like — like 
Nadar?" 

"Certain." 

"  Then,  friend  Barbicane,  if  they  are  as  strong  as  we  are, 
and  even  stronger — these  Selenites — why  have  they  not 
tried  to  communicate  with  the  earth?  why  have  they  not 
launched  a  lunar  projectile  to  our  terrestrial  regions?" 

"Who  told  you  that  they  have  never  done  so?"  said 
Barbicane,  seriously. 


276  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"  Indeed,"  added  Nicholl,  "  it  would  be  easier  for  them 
than  for  us,  for  two  reasons;  first,  because  the  attraction 
on  the  moon's  surface  is  six  times  less  than  on  that  of  the 
earth,  which  would  allow  a  projectile  to  rise  more  easily; 
secondly,  because  it  would  be  enough  to  send  such  a  pro- 
jectile only  at  8,000  leagues  instead  of  80,000,  which  would 
require  the  force  of  projection  to  be  ten  times  less  strong." 

"  Then,'"  continued  Michel,  "  I  repeat  it,  why  have  they 
not  done  it?  " 

"And  I  repeat,"  said  Barbicane;  "who  told  you  that 
they  have  not  done  it?  " 

"When?" 

"Thousands  of  years  before  man  appeared  on  earth." 

"And  the  projectile — where  is  the  projectile?  I  de- 
mand to  see  the  projectile." 

"  My  friend,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  the  sea  covers  five- 
sixths  of  our  globe.  From  that  we  may  draw  five  good 
reasons  for  supposing  that  the  lunar  projectile,  if  ever 
launched,  is  now  at  the  bottom  of  the  Atlantic  or  the  Pa- 
cific, unless  it  sped  into  some  crevasse  at  that  period  when 
the  crust  of  the  earth  was  not  yet  hardened." 

"  Old  Barbicane,"  said  Michel,  "  you  have  an  answer 
for  everything,  and  I  bow  before  your  wisdom.  But  there 
is  one  hypothesis  that  would  suit  me  better  than  all  the 
others,  which  is,  that  the  Selenites,  being  older  than  we,  are 
wiser,  and  have  not  invented  gunpowder" 

At  this  moment  Diana  joined  in  the  conversation  by  a 
sonorous  barking.     She  was  asking  for  her  breakfast. 

"  Ah !  "  said  Michel  Ardan,  "  in  our  discussion  we  have 
forgotten  Diana  and  Satellite." 

Immediately  a  good-sized  pie  was  given  to  the  dog, 
which  devoured  it  hungrily. 

"  Do  you  see,  Barbicane,"  said  Michel,  "  we  should  have 
made  a  second  Noah's  Ark  of  this  projectile,  and  borne 
with  us  to  the  moon  a  couple  of  every  kind  of  domestic 
animal." 

"  I  dare  say ;  but  room  would  have  failed  us." 

"  Oh !  "  said  Michel,  "  we  might  have  squeezed  a  little." 

"The  fact  is,"  replied  Nicholl,  "that  cows,  bulls,  and 
horses,  and  all  ruminants,  would  have  been  very  useful  on 
the  lunar  continent,  but  unfortunately  the  car  could  neither 
have  been  made  a  stable  nor  a  shed." 


THE  COLD  OF  SPACE  277 

"  Well,  we  might  at  least  have  brought  a  donkey,  only  a 
little  donkey ;  that  courageous  beast  which  old  Silenus  loved 
to  mount.  I  love  those  old  donkeys;  they  are  the  least 
favored  animals  in  creation ;  they  are  not  only  beaten  while 
alive,  but  even  after  they  are  dead." 

"  How  do  you  make  that  out?  "  asked  Barbicane. 

"Why,"  said  Michel,  "they  make  their  skins  into 
drums." 

Barbicane  and  Nicholl  could  not  help  laughing  at  this 
ridiculous  remark.  But  a  cry  from  their  merry  compan- 
ion stopped  them.  The  latter  was  leaning  over  the  spot 
where  Satellite  lay.     He  rose,  saying: 

"  My  good  Satellite  is  no  longer  ill." 

"Ah!"  said  Nicholl. 

"No,"  answered  Michel,  "he  is  dead!  There,"  added 
he,  in  a  piteous  tone,  "  that  is  embarrassing.  I  much  fear, 
my  poor  Diana,  that  you  will  leave  no  progeny  in  the  lunar 
regions ! " 

Indeed  the  unfortunate  Satellite  had  not  survived  his 
wound.  He  was  quite  dead.  Michel  Ardan  looked  at  his 
friends  with  a  rueful  countenance. 

"  One  question  presents  itself,"  said  Barbicane.  "  We 
cannot  keep  the  dead  body  of  this  dog  with  us  for  the  next 
forty-eight  hours." 

"  No !  certainly  not,"  replied  Nicholl ;  "  but  our  scuttles 
are  fixed  on  hinges;  they  can  be  let  down.  We  will  open 
one,  and  throw  the  body  out  into  space." 

The  president  thought  for  some  moments,  and  then  he 
said: 

"  Yes,  we  must  do  so,  but  at  the  same  time  taking  very 
great  precautions." 

"Why?"  asked  Michel. 

"  For  two  reasons  which  you  will  understand,"  answered 
Barbicane.  "  The  first  relates  to  the  air  shut  up  in  the  pro- 
jectile, and  of  which  we  must  lose  as  little  as  possible." 

"  But  we  manufacture  the  air?  " 

"  Only  in  part.  We  make  only  the  oxygen,  my  worthy 
Michel;  and  with  regard  to  that,  we  must  watch  that  the 
apparatus  does  not  furnish  the  oxygen  in  too  great  a  quan- 
tity; for  an  excess  would  bring  us  very  serious  physiolog- 
ical troubles.  But  if  we  make  the  oxygen,  we  do  not  make 
the  azote,  that  medium  which  the  lungs  do  not  absorb,  and 


278  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

which  ought  to  remain  intact;  and  that  azote  will  escape 
rapidly  through  the  open  scuttles." 

"Oh!  the  time  for  throwing  out  poor  Satellite?"  said 
Michel. 

"  Agreed;  but  we  must  act  quickly." 

"  And  the  second  reason  ?  "  asked  Michel. 

"  The  second  reason  is  that  we  must  not  let  the  outer 
cold,  which  is  excessive,  penetrate  the  projectile,  or  we  shall 
be  frozen  to  death." 

"But  the  sun?" 

"  The  sun  warms  our  projectile,  which  absorbs  its  rays, 
but  it  does  not  warm  the  vacuum  in  which  we  are  floating 
at  this  moment.  Where  there  is  no  air,  there  is  no  more 
heat  than  diffused  light;  and  the  same  with  darkness;  it  is 
cold  where  the  sun's  rays  do  not  strike  direct.  This  tem- 
perature is  only  the  temperature  produced  by  the  radiation 
of  the  stars;  that  is  to  say,  what  the  terrestrial  globe  would 
undergo  if  the  sun  disappeared  one  day." 

"  Which  is  not  to  be  feared,"  replied  Nicholl. 

"Who  knows?"  said  Michel  Ardan.  "But,  in  admit- 
ting that  the  sun  does  not  go  out,  might  it  not  happen  that 
the  earth  might  move  away  from  it?  " 

"There!"  said  Barbicane,  "there  is  Michel  with  his 
ideas." 

"  And,"  continued  Michel,  "  do  we  not  know  that  in 
1861  the  earth  passed  through  the  tail  of  a  comet?  Or 
let  us  suppose  a  comet  whose  power  of  attraction  is  greater 
than  that  of  the  sun.  The  terrestrial  orbit  will  bend 
towards  the  wandering  star,  and  the  earth,  becoming  its 
satellite,  will  be  drawn  such  a  distance  that  the  rays  of 
the  sun  will  have  no  action  on  its  surface." 

"  That  might  happen,  indeed,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  but 
the  conesquences  of  such  a  displacement  need  not  be  so  for- 
midable as  you  suppose." 

"And  why  not?" 

"  Because  the  heat  and  the  cold  would  be  equalized  on 
our  globe.  It  has  been  calculated  that,  had  our  earth  been 
carried  along  in  its  course  by  the  comet  of  1861,  at  its  peri- 
helion, that  is,  its  nearest  approach  to  the  sun,  it  would  have 
undergone  a  heat  28,000  times  greater  than  that  of  sum- 
mer. But  this  heat,  which  is  sufficient  to  evaporate  the 
waters,  would  have  formed  a  thick  ring  of  cloud,  which 


THE  COLD  OF  SPACE  279 

would  have  modified  that  excessive  temperature;  hence  the 
compensation  between  the  cold  of  the  aphelion  and  the  heat 
of  the  perihelion." 

At  how  many  degrees,"  asked  Nicholl,  "  is  the  tem- 
perature of  the  planetary  spaces  estimated?  " 

"Formerly,"  replied  Barbicane,  "its  cold  was  greatly 
exaggerated;  but  now,  after  the  calculations  of  Fourier, 
of  the  French  Academy  of  Science,  it  is  not  supposed  to 
exceed  6o°  centigrade  below  zero." 

"Pooh!"  said  Michel,  "that's  nothing!" 

"  It  is  very  much,"  replied  Barbicane ;  "  the  temperature 
which  was  observed  in  the  polar  regions,  at  Melville  Island 
and  Fort  Reliance,  that  is  760  Fahrenheit  below  zero." 

"  If  I  mistake  not,"  said  Nicholl,  "  M.  Pouillet,  another 
savant,  estimates  the  temperature  of  space  at  250°  Fahren- 
heit below  zero.  We  shall,  however,  be  able  to  verify  these 
calculations  for  ourselves." 

"  Not  at  present ;  because  the  solar  rays,  beating  directly 
upon  our  thermometer,  would  give,  on  the  contrary,  a 
very  high  temperature.  But,  when  we  arrive  in  the  moon, 
during  its  fifteen  days  of  night  at  either  face,  we  shall  have 
leisure  to  make  the  experiment,  for  our  satellite  lies  in  a 
vacuum." 

"  What  do  you  mean  by  a  vacuum?  "  asked  Michel.  "  Is 
it  perfectly  such?" 

"  It  is  absolutely  void  of  air." 

"  And  is  the  air  replaced  by  nothing  whatever?  " 

"  By  the  ether  only,"  repiled  Barbicane. 

"And  pray  what  is  the  ether?" 

"The  ether,  my  friend,  is  an  agglomeration  of  impon- 
derable atoms,  which,  relatively  to  their  dimensions,  are  as 
far  removed  from  each  other  as  the  celestial  bodies  are  in 
space.  It  is  these  atoms  which,  by  their  vibratory  motions, 
produce  both  light  and  heat  in  the  universe." 

They  now  proceeded  to  the  burial  of  Satellite.  They 
had  merely  to  drop  him  into  space,  in  the  same  way  that 
sailors  drop  a  body  into  the  sea;  but,  as  President  Barbi- 
cane suggested,  they  must  act  quickly,  so  as  to  lose  as  little 
as  possible  of  that  air  whose  elasticity  would  rapidly  have 
spread  it  into  space.  The  bolts  of  the  right  scuttle,  the 
opening  of  which  measured  about  twelve  inches  across, 
were  carefully  drawn,  whilst  Michel,  quite  grieved,  pre- 


280  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

pared  to  launch  his  dog  into  space.  The  glass,  raised  by  a 
powerful  lever,  which  enabled  it  to  overcome  the  pressure 
of  the  inside  air  on  the  walls  of  the  projectile,  turned  rap- 
idly on  its  hinges,  and  Satellite  was  thrown  out.  Scarcely 
a  particle  of  air  could  have  escaped,  and  the  operation  was 
so  successful,  that  later  on  Barbicane  did  not  fear  to  dis- 
pose of  the  rubbish  which  encumbered  the  car. 


CHAPTER   VI 

QUESTION  AND  ANSWER 

On  the  4th  of  December,  when  the  travelers  awoke 
after  fifty-four  hours'  journey,  the  chronometer  marked 
five  o'clock  of  the  terrestrial  morning.  In  time  it  was 
just  over  five  hours  and  forty  minutes,  half  of  that  as- 
signed to  their  sojourn  in  the  projectile;  but  they  had  al- 
ready accomplished  nearly  seven-tenths  of  the  way.  This 
peculiarity  was  due  to  their  regularly  decreasing  speed. 

Now  when  they  observed  the  earth  through  the  lower 
window,  it  looked  like  nothing  more  than  a  dark  spot, 
drowned  in  the  solar  rays.  No  more  crescent,  no  more 
cloudy  light!  The  next  day,  at  midnight,  the  earth  would 
be  new,  at  the  very  moment  when  the  moon  would  be  full. 
Above,  the  orb  of  night  was  nearing  the  line  followed  by 
the  projectile,  so  as  to  meet  it  at  the  given  hour.  All 
around  the  black  vault  was  studded  with  brilliant  points, 
which  seemed  to  move  slowly;  but,  at  the  great  distance 
they  were  from  them,  their  relative  size  did  not  seem  to 
change.  The  sun  and  stars  appeared  exactly  as  they  do 
to  us  upon  earth.  As  to  the  moon,  she  was  considerably 
larger;  but  the  travelers'  glasses,  not  very  powerful,  did 
not  allow  them  as  yet  to  make  any  useful  observations  upon 
her  surface,  or  reconnoiter  her  topographically  or  geolog- 
ically. 

Thus  the  time  passed  in  never-ending  conversations  all 
about  the  moon.  Each  one  brought  forward  his  own  con- 
tingent of  particular  facts;  Barbicane  and  Nicholl  always 
serious,  Michel  Ardan  always  enthusiastic.  The  projec- 
tile, its  situation,  its  direction,  incidents  which  might  hap- 
pen, the  precautions  necessitated  by  their  fall  onto  the 
moon,  were  inexhaustible  matters  of  conjecture. 


QUESTION  AND  ANSWER  281 

As  they  were  breakfasting,  a  question  of  Michel's  relat- 
ing to  the  projectile,  provoked  rather  a  curious  answer 
from  Barbicane,  which  is  worth  repeating.  Michel,  sup- 
posing it  to  be  roughly  stopped,  whilst  still  under  its  for- 
midable initial  speed,  wished  to  know  what  the  conse- 
quences of  the  stoppage  would  have  been. 

"  But,"  said  Barbicane,  "  I  do  not  see  how  it  could  have 
been  stopped." 

"  But  let  us  suppose  so,"  said  Michel. 
_  "  It  is  an  impossible  supposition,"  said  the  practical  Bar- 
bicane; "unless  the  impulsive  force  had  failed;  but  even 
then  its  speed  would  diminish  by  degrees,  and  it  would  not 
have  stopped  suddenly." 

"  Admit  that  it  had  struck  a  body  in  space." 

"What  body?" 

"  Why,  that  enormous  meteor  which  we  met." 

"  Then,"  said  Nicholl,  "  the  projectile  would  have  been 
broken  into  a  thousand  pieces,  and  we  with  it." 

"  More  than  that,"  replied  Barbicane ;  "  we  should  have 
been  burned  to  death." 

"Burned?"  exclaimed  Michel,  "by  Jove!  I  am  sorry 
it  did  not  happen,  '  just  to  see.'  " 

"  And  you  would  have  seen,"  replied  Barbicane.  "  It 
is  known  now  that  heat  is  only  a  modification  of  motion. 
When  water  is  warmed — that  is  to  say,  when  heat  is 
added  to  it — its  particles  are  set  in  motion." 

"Well,"  said  Michel,  "that  is  an  ingenious  theory!" 

"  And  a  true  one  my  worthy  friend ;  for  it  explains 
every  phenomenon  of  caloric.  Heat  is  but  the  motion  of 
atoms,  a  simple  oscillation  of  the  particles  of  a  body. 
When  they  apply  the  brake  to  a  train,  the  train  comes  to  a 
stop;  but  what  becomes  of  the  motion  which  it  had  pre- 
viously possessed?  It  is  transformed  into  heat,  and  the 
brake  becomes  hot  Why  do  they  grease  the  axles  of  the 
wheels?  To  prevent  their  heating,  because  this  heat  would 
be  generated  by  the  motion  which  is  thus  lost  by  transfor- 
mation." 

"  Yes,  I  understand  perfectly,"  replied  Michel.  "  For 
example,  when  I  have  run  a  long  time,  when  I  am  swim- 
ming, when  I  am  perspiring  in  large  drops,  why  am  I 
obliged  to  stop?  Simply  because  my  motion  is  changed 
into  heat." 


282  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

Barbicane  could  not  help  smiling  at  Michel's  reply; 
then,  returning  to  his  theory,  said : 

"  Thus,  in  case  of  a  shock,  it  would  have  been  with  our 
projectile  as  with  a  ball  which  falls  in  a  burning  state  after 
having  struck  the  metal  plate;  it  is  its  motion  which  is 
turned  into  heat.  Consequently  I  affirm  that,  if  our  pro- 
jectile had  struck  the  meteor,  its  speed  thus  Isuddenly 
checked  would  have  raised  a  heat  great  enough  to  turn  it 
into  vapor  instantaneously." 

"Then,"  asked  Nicholl,  "what  would  happen  if  the 
earth's  motion  were  to  stop  suddenly?  " 

"  Her  temperature  would  be  raised  to  such  a  pitch," 
said  Barbicane,  "that  she  would  be  at  once  reduced  to 
vapor." 

"  Well,"  said  Michel,  "  that  is  a  way  of  ending  the  earth 
which  will  greatly  simplify  things." 

"And  if  the  earth  fell  upon  the  sun?"  asked  Nicholl. 

"  According  to  calculation,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  the  fall 
would  develop  a  heat  equal  to  that  produced  by  16,000 
globes  of  coal,  each  equal  in  bulk  to  our  terrestrial  globe." 

"  Good  additional  heat  for  the  sun,"  replied  Michel 
Ardan,  "of  which  the  inhabitants  of  Uranus  or  Neptune 
would  doubtless  not  complain;  they  must  be  perished  with 
cold  on  their  planets." 

"Thus,  my  friends,"  said  Barbicane,  "all  motion  sud- 
denly stopped  produces  heat.  And  this  theory  allows  us 
to  infer  that  the  heat  of  the  solar  disc  is  fed  by  a  hail  of 
meteors  falling  incessantly  on  its  surface.  They  have 
even  calculated " 

"Oh,  dear!"  murmured  Michel,  "the  figures  are  com- 
ing." 

"They  have  even  calculated,"  continued  the  imperturb- 
able Barbicane,  "  that  the  shock  of  each  meteor  on  the  sun 
ought  to  produce  a  heat  equal  to  that  of  4,000  masses  of 
coal  of  an  equal  bulk." 

"  And  what  is  the  solar  heat?  "  asked  Michel. 

"It  is  equal  to  that  produced  by  the  combustion  of  a 
stratum  of  coal  surrounding  the  sun  to  a  depth  of  forty- 
seven  miles." 

"  And  that  heat " 

"  Would  be  able  to  boil  two  billions  nine  hundred  mil- 
lions of  cubic  myriameters  of  water." 


QUESTION  AND  ANSWER  283 

"  And  it  does  not  roast  us ! "  exclaimed  Michel. 

"  No,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  because  the  terrestrial  at- 
mosphere absorbs  four-tenths  of  the  solar  heat;  besides, 
the  quantity  of  heat  intercepted  by  the  earth  is  but  a  bil- 
lionth part  of  the  entire  radiation." 

"  I  see  that  all  is  for  the  best,"  said  Michel,  "  and  that 
this  atmosphere  is  a  useful  invention;  for  it  not  only  allows 
us  to  breathe,  but  it  prevents  us  from  roasting." 

"Yes!"  said  Nicholl,  "unfortunately,  it  will  not  be  the 
same  in  the  moon." 

"Bah!"  said  Michel,  always  hopeful.  "If  there  are 
inhabitants,  they  must  breathe.  If  there  are  no  longer 
any,  they  must  have  left  enough  oxygen  for  three  people, 
if  only  at  the  bottom  of  ravines,  where  its  own  weight 
will  cause  it  to  accumulate,  and  we  will  not  climb  the  moun- 
tains; that  is  all."  And  Michel,  rising,  went  to  look  at 
the  lunar  disc,  which  shone  with  intolerable  brilliancy. 

"  By  Jove !  "  said  he,  "  it  must  be  hot  up  there !  " 

"  Without  considering,"  replied  Nicholl,  "  that  the  day 
lasts  360  hours ! " 

"  And  to  compensate  that,"  said  Barbicane,  "  the  nights 
have  the  same  length;  and  as  heat  is  restored  by  radia- 
tion, their  temperature  can  only  be  that  of  the  planetary 
space." 

"  A  pretty  country,  that !  "  exclaimed  Michel.  "  Never 
mind!  I  wish  I  was  there!  Ah!  my  dear  comrades,  it 
will  be  rather  curious  to  have  the  earth  for  our  moon,  to 
see  it  rise  on  the  horizon,  to  recognize  the  shape  of  its 
continents,  and  to  say  to  oneself,  '  There  is  America,  there 
is  Europe ';  then  to  follow  it  when  it  is  about  to  lose  itself 
in  the  sun's  rays!  Now  tell  me,  Barbicane,  do  you  be- 
lieve the  moon  is  an  old  comet  ?  " 

"  There's  an  idea !  " 

"  Yes,"  replied  Michel,  with  an  amiable  swagger,  "  I 
have  a  few  ideas  of  that  sort." 

"  But  that  idea  does  not  spring  from  Michel,"  answered 
Nicholl. 

"  Well,  then,  I  am  a  plagiarist." 

"No  doubt  about  it.  According  to  the  ancients,  the 
Arcadians  pretend  that  their  ancestors  inhabited  the  earth 
before  the  moon  became  her  satellite.  Starting  from  this 
fact,  some  scientific  men  have  seen  in  the  moon  a  comet 


284  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

whose  orbit  one  day  brought  it  so  near  to  the  earth  that  it 
was  held  there  by  its  attraction." 

"  Is  there  any  truth  in  this  hypothesis  ?  "  asked  Michel. 

"  None  whatever,"  said  Barbicane,  "  and  the  proof  is, 
that  the  moon  has  preserved  no  trace  of  the  gaseous  en- 
velope which  always  accompanies  comets." 

"  But,"  continued  Nicholl,  "  before  becoming  the  earth's 
satellite,  could  not  the  moon,  when  in  her  perihelion,  pass 
so  near  the  sun  as  by  evaporation  to  get  rid  of  all  those 
gaseous  substances  ?  " 

"  It  is  possible,  friend  Nicholl,  but  not  probable." 

"Why  not?" 

"  Because — Faith,  I  do  not  know." 

"  Ah !  "  exclaimed  Michel,  "  what  hundreds  of  volumes 
we  might  make  of  all  that  we  do  not  know !  " 

"  Ah !  indeed.     What  time  is  it  ?  "  asked  Barbicane. 

"  Three  o'clock,"  answered  Nicholl. 

"  How  time  goes,"  said  Michel,  "  in  the  conversation  of 
scientific  men  such  as  we  are !  Certainly,  I  feel  I  know  too 
much !     I  feel  that  I  am  becoming  a  well !  " 

Saying  which,  Michel  hoisted  himself  to  the  roof  of  the 
projectile,  "  to  observe  the  moon  better,"  he  pretended. 
During  this  time  his  companions  were  watching  through 
the  lower  glass.     Nothing  new  to  note! 

When  Michel  Ardan  came  down  he  went  to  the  side  scut- 
tle; and  suddenly  they  heard  an  exclamation  of  surprise! 

"  What  is  it  ?  "  asked  Barbicane. 

The  president  approached  the  window,  and  saw  a  sort 
of  flattened  sack  floating  some  yards  from  the  projectile. 
This  object  seemed  as  motionless  as  the  projectile,  and  was 
consequently  animated  with  the  same  ascending  movement. 

"  What  is  that  machine  ? "  continued  Michel  Ardan. 
"  Is  it  one  of  the  bodies  of  space  which  our  projectile  keeps 
within  its  attraction,  and  which  will  accompany  it  to  the 
moon  ?  " 

"  What  astonishes  me,"  said  Nicholl,  "  is  that  the  spe- 
cific weight  of  the  body,  which  is  certainly  less  than  that 
of  the  projectile,  allows  it  to  keep  so  perfectly  on  a  level 
with  it." 

"  Nicholl,"  replied  Barbicane,  after  a  moment's  reflec- 
tion, "  I  do  not  know  what  the  object  is,  but  I  do  know 
why  it  maintains  our  level." 


QUESTION  AND  ANSWER  285 

"And  why?" 

"  Because  we  are  floating  in  space,  my  dear  captain,  and 
in  space  bodies  fall  or  move  (which  is  the  same  thing) 
with  equal  speed  whatever  be  their  weight  or  form;  it  is 
the  air,  which  by  its  resistance  creates  these  differences  in 
weight.  When  you  create  a  vacuum  in  a  tube,  the  objects 
you  send  through  it,  grains  of  dust  or  grains  of  lead,  fall 
with  the  same  rapidity.  Here  in  space  is  the  same  cause 
and  the  same  effect." 

"  Just  so,"  said  Nicholl,  "  and  everything  we  throw  out 
of  the  projectile  will  accompany  it  until  it  reaches  the 
moon." 

"  Ah !  fools  that  we  are ! "  exclaimed  Michel. 

"  Why  that  expletive  ?  "  asked  Barbicane. 

"  Because  we  might  have  filled  the  projectile  with  use- 
ful objects,  books,  instruments,  tools,  etc.  We  could  have 
thrown  them  all  out,  and  all  would  have  followed  in  our 
train.  But  happy  thought!  Why  cannot  we  walk  out- 
side like  the  meteor?  Why  cannot  we  launch  into  space 
through  the  scuttle  ?  What  enjoyment  it  would  be  to  feel 
oneself  thus  suspended  in  ether,  more  favored  than  the 
birds  who  must  use  their  wings  to  keep  themselves  up ! " 

"  Granted,"  said  Barbicane,  "  but  how  to  breathe  ?  " 

"  Hang  the  air,  to  fail  so  inopportunely !  " 

"But  if  it  did  not  fail,  Michel,  your  density  being  less 
than  that  of  the  projectile,  you  would  soon  be  left  be- 
hind." 

"  Then  we  must  remain  in  our  car?  " 

"We  must!" 

"  Ah ! "  exclaimed  Michel,  in  a  loud  voice. 

"  What  is  the  matter? "  asked  Nicholl. 

"I  know,  I  guess,  what  this  pretended  meteor  is!  It 
is  no  asteroid  which  is  accompanying  us !  It  is  not  a  piece 
of  a  planet." 

"  What  is  it  then  ?  "  asked  Barbicane. 

"It  is  our  unfortunate  dog!     It  is  Diana's  husband!" 

Indeed,  this  deformed,  unrecognizable  object,  reduced  to 
nothing,  was  the  body  of  Satellite,  flattened  like  a  bagpipe 
without  wind,  and  ever  mounting,  mounting ! 


CHAPTER   VII 

K    MOMENT    OF   INTOXICATION 

Thus  a  phenomenon,  curious  but  explicable,  was  hap- 
pening under  these  strange  conditions. 

Every  object  thrown  from  the  projectile  would  follow 
the  same  course  and  never  stop  until  it  did.  There  was 
a  subject  for  conversation  which  the  whole  evening  could 
not  exhaust. 

Besides,  the  excitement  of  the  three  travelers  increased 
as  they  drew  near  the  end  of  their  journey.  They  ex- 
pected unforeseen  incidents,  and  new  phenomena;  and 
nothing  would  have  astonished  them  in  the  frame  of  mind 
they  then  were  in.  Their  over-excited  imagination  went 
faster  than  the  projectile,  whose  speed  was  evidently  di- 
minishing, though  insensibly  to  themselves.  But  the  moon 
grew  larger  to  their  eyes,  and  they  fancied  if  they  stretched 
out  their  hands  they  could  seize  it. 

The  next  day,  the  5th  of  November,  at  five  in  the  morn- 
ing, all  three  were  on  foot.  That  day  was  to  be  the  last 
of  their  journey,  if  all  calculations  were  true.  That  very 
night  at  twelve  o'clock,  in  eighteen  hours,  exactly  at  the 
full  moon,  they  would  reach  its  brilliant  disc.  The  next 
midnight  would  see  that  journey  ended,  the  most  extraor- 
dinary of  ancient  or  modern  times.  Thus  from  the  first 
of  the  morning,  through  the  scuttles  silvered  by  its  rays, 
they  saluted  the  orb  of  night  with  a  confident  and  joyous 
hurrah. 

The  moon  was  advancing  majestically  along  the  starry 
firmament.  A  few  more  degrees,  and  she  would  reach 
the  exact  point  where  her  meeting  with  the  projectile  was 
to  take  place. 

According  to  his  own  observations,  Barbicane  reckoned 
that  they  would  land  on  her  northern  hemisphere,  where 
stretch  immense  plains,  and  where  mountains  are  rare.  A 
favorable  circumstance  if,  as  they  thought,  the  lunar  at- 
mosphere was  stored  only  in  its  depths. 

"  Besides,"  observed  Michel  Ardan,  "  a  plain  is  easier  to 
disembark  upon  than  a  mountain.  A  Selenite,  deposited 
in  Europe  on  the  summit  of  Mont  Blanc,  or  in  Asia  on  the 
top  of  the  Himalayas,  would  not  be  quite  in  the  right 
place." 

28* 


A  MOMENT  OF  INTOXICATION  287 

"  And,"  added  Captain  Nicholl,  "on  a  flat  ground,  the 
projectile  will  remain  motionless  when  it  has  once  touched ; 
whereas  on  a  declivity  it  would  roll  like  an  avalanche,  and 
not  being  squirrels  we  should  not  come  out  safe  and  sound. 
So  it  is  all  for  the  best." 

Indeed,  the  success  of  the  audacious  attempt  no  longer 
appeared  doubtful.  But  Barbicane  was  preoccupied  with 
one  thought;  but  not  wishing  to  make  his  companions  un- 
easy, he  kept  silence  on  the  subject. 

The  direction  the  projectile  was  taking  towards  the 
moon's  ^  northern  hemisphere,  showed  that  her  course  had 
been  slightly  altered.  The  discharge,  mathematically  cal- 
culated, would  carry  the  projectile  to  the  very  center  of 
the  lunar  disc.  If  it  did  not  land  there,  there  must  have 
been  some  deviation.  What  had  caused  it?  Barbicane 
could  neither  imagine,  nor  determine  the  importance  of 
the  deviation,  for  there  were  no  points  to  go  by. 

He  hoped,  however,  that  it  would  have  no  other  result 
than  bringing  them  near  the  upper  border  of  the  moon,  a 
region  more  suitable  for  landing. 

Without  imparting  his  uneasiness  to  his  companions, 
Barbicane  contented  himself  with  constantly  observing  the 
moon,  in  order  to  see  whether  the  course  of  the  projectile 
would  not  be  altered;  for  the  situation  would  have  been 
terrible  if  it  failed  in  its  aim,  and  being  carried  beyond  the 
disc  should  be  launched  into  interplanetary  space.  At  that 
moment,  the  moon,  instead  of  appearing  flat  like  a  disc, 
showed  its  convexity.  If  the  sun's  rays  had  struck  it 
obliquely,  the  shadow  thrown  would  have  brought  out  the 
high  mountains,  which  would  have  been  clearly  detached. 
The  eye  might  have  gazed  into  the  crater's  gaping  abysses, 
and  followed  the  capricious  fissures  which  wound  through 
the  immense  plains.  But  all  relief  was  as  yet  leveled  in 
intense  brilliancy.  They  could  scarcely  distinguish  those 
large  spots  which  give  to  the  moon  the  appearance  of  a  hu- 
man face. 

"Face,  indeed!"  said  Michel  Ardan;  "but  I  am  sorry 
for  the  amiable  sister  of  Apollo.  A  very  pitted  face ! " 
But  the  travelers,  now  so  near  the  end,  were  incessantly 
observing  this  new  world.  They  imagined  themselves 
walking  through  its  unknown  countries,  climbing  its  high- 


288  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

est  peaks,  descending  into  its  lowest  depths.  Here  and 
there  they  fancied  they  saw  vast  seas,  scarcely  kept  to- 
gether under  so  rarefied  an  atmosphere,  and  watercourses 
emptying  the  mountain  tributaries.  Leaning  over  the 
abyss,  they  hoped  to  catch  some  sounds  from  that  orb  for- 
ever mute  in  the  solitude  of  space.  That  last  day  left 
them. 

They  took  down  the  most  trifling  details.  A  vague  un- 
easiness took  possession  of  them  as  they  neared  the  end. 
This  uneasiness  would  have  been  doubled  had  they  felt 
how  their  speed  had  decreased.  It  would  have  seemed  to 
them  quite  insufficient  to  carry  them  to  the  end.  It  was 
because  the  projectile  then  "  weighed "  almost  nothing. 
Its  weight  was  ever  decreasing,  and  would  be  entirely  an- 
nihilated on  that  line  where  the  lunar  and  terrestrial  attrac- 
tions would  neutralize  each  other. 

But  in  spite  of  his  preoccupation,  Michel  Ardan  did  not 
forget  to  prepare  the  morning  repast  with  his  accustomed 
punctuality.  They  ate  with  a  good  appetite.  Nothing 
was  so  excellent  as  the  soup  liquefied  by  the  heat  of  the  gas ; 
nothing  better  than  the  preserved  meat.  Some  glasses  of 
good  French  wine  crowned  the  repast,  causing  Michel 
Ardan  to  remark  that  the  lunar  vines,  warmed  by  that  ar- 
dent sun,  ought  to  distill  even  more  generous  wines;  that 
is,  if  they  existed.  In  any  case,  the  far-seeing  Frenchman 
had  taken  care  not  to  forget  in  his  collection  some  precious 
cuttings  of  the  Medoc  and  Cote  d'Or,  upon  which  he 
founded  his  hopes. 

Reiset  and  Regnault's  apparatus  worked  with  great  reg- 
ularity. Not  an  atom  of  carbonic  acid  resisted  the  potash; 
and  as  to  the  oxygen  Captain  Nicholl  said,  "  it  was  of  the 
first  quality."  The  little  watery  vapor  enclosed  in  the 
projectile  mixing  with  the  air  tempered  the  dryness;  and 
many  apartments  in  London,  Paris,  or  New  York  and 
many  theaters,  were  not  in  such  a  healthy  condition.  But 
that  it  might  act  with  regularity,  the  apparatus  must  be 
kept  in  perfect  order;  so  each  morning  Michel  visited  the 
escape  regulators,  tried  the  taps,  and  regulated  the  heat  of 
the  gas  by  the  pyrometer.  Everything  had  gone  well  up 
to  that  time,  and  the  travelers,  imitating  the  worthy  Jo- 
seph T.  Maston,  began  to  acquire  a  degree  of  embonpoint, 
which  would  have  rendered  them  unrecognizable  if  their 
y.  Ill  Verne 


■  ■    .\ 


THE  REVERSAL  OF  GRAVITATION 

The  three  adventurous  companions  were  surprised  and  stupefied, 
despite  their  scientific  reasonings.  They  felt  themselves  being  carried 
into  the  domain  of  wonders  !  They  felt  that  -weight  was  really  wanting  to 
their  bodies.  If  they  stretched  out  their  arms,  they  did  not  attempt  to 
fall.  Their  heads  shook  on  their  shoulders.  Their  feet  no  longer  clung 
to  the  floor  of  the  projectile.  They  were  like  drunken  men  having  no 
stability  in  themselves. 

Fancy  has  depicted  men  without  reflection,  others  without  shadow. 
But  here  reality,  by  the  neutralization  of  attractive  forces,  produced 
men  in  whom  nothing  had  any  weight,  and  who  weighed  nothing 
themselves. 

Suddenly  Michel,  taking  a  spring,  left  the  floor  and  remained 
suspended  in  the  air,  like  Murillo's  monk  of  the  Cusine.  des  Anges. 

The  two  friends  joined  him  instantly,  and  all  three  formed  a  mirac- 
ulous 'Ascension"  in  the  center  of  the  projectile. — Page  298. 


A  MOMENT  OF  INTOXICATION  289 

imprisonment  had  been  prolonged  to  some  months.  In  a 
word,  they  behaved  like  chickens  in  a  coop;  they  were  get- 
ting fat. 

In  looking  through  the  scuttle  Barbicane  saw  the  specter 
of  the  dog,  and.  other  divers  objects  which  had  been  thrown 
from  the  projectile  obstinately  following  them.  Diana 
howled  lugubriously  on  seeing  the  remains  of  Satellite, 
which  seemed  as  motionless  as  if  they  reposed  on  the  solid 
earth. 

"  Do  you  know,  my  friends,"  said  Michel  Ardan,  "  that 
if  one  of  us  had  succumbed  to  the  shock  consequent  on  de- 
parture, we  should  have  had  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  bury 
him?  What  am  I  saying?  to  etherise  him,  as  here  ether 
takes  the  place  of  earth.  You  see  the  accusing  body  would 
have  followed  us  into  space  like  a  remorse." 

"  That  would  have  been  sad,"  said  Nicholl. 

"Ah!"  continued  Michel,  "what  I  regret  is  not  being 
able  to  take  a  walk  outside.  What  voluptuousness  to  float 
amid  this  radiant  ether,  to  bathe  oneself  in  it,  to  wrap  one- 
self in  the  sun's  pure  rays.  If  Barbicane  had  only  thought 
of  furnishing  us  with  a  diving  apparatus  and  an  air  pump, 
I  could  have  ventured  out  and  assumed  fanciful  attitudes 
of  feigned  monsters  on  the  top  of  the  projectile." 

"  Well,  old  Michel,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  you  would  not 
have  made  a  feigned  monster  long,  for  in  spite  of  your 
diver's  dress,  swollen  by  the  expansion  of  air  within  you, 
you  would  have  burst  like  a  shell,  or  rather  like  a  balloon 
which  has  risen  too  high.  So  do  not  regret  it,  and  do  not 
forget  this — as  long  as  we  float  in  space,  all  sentimental 
walks  beyond  the  projectile  are  forbidden." 

Michel  Ardan  allowed  himself  to  be  convinced  to  a  cer- 
tain extent.  He  admitted  that  the  thing  was  difficult  but 
not  impossible,  a  word  which  he  never  uttered. 

The  conversation  passed  from  this  subject  to  another, 
not  failing  for  an  instant.  It  seemed  to  the  three  friends 
as  though,  under  present  conditions,  ideas  shot  up  in  their 
brains  as  leaves  shoot  up  at  the  first  warmth  of  spring. 
They  felt  bewildered.  In  the  middle  of  the  questions  and 
answers  which  crossed  each  other,  Nicholl  put  one  question 
which  did  not  find  an  immediate  solution. 

"  Ah,  indeed !  "  said  he ;  "  it  is  all  very  well  to  go  to  the 
moon,  but  how  to  get  back  again?  " 


290  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

His  two  interlocutors  looked  surprised.  One  would 
have  thought  that  this  possibility  now  occurred  to  them 
for  the  first  time. 

"  What  do  you  mean  by  that,  Nicholl  ?  "  asked  Barbi- 
cane  gravely. 

"  To  ask  for  means  to  leave  a  country,"  added  Michel, 
"  when  we  have  not  yet  arrived  there,  seems  to  me  rather 
inopportune." 

"  I  do  not  say  that,  wishing  to  draw  back,"  replied 
Nicholl ;  "  but  I  repeat  my  question,  and  I  ask,  '  How  shall 
we  return  ?  '  " 

"  I  know  nothing  about  it,"  answered  Barbicane. 

"And  I,"  said  Michel,  "if  I  had  known  how  to  return, 
I  would  never  have  started." 

"There's  an  answer!"  cried  Nicholl. 

"I  quite  approve  of  Michel's  words,"  said  Barbicane; 
"  and  add,  that  the  question  has  no  real  interest.  Later, 
when  we  think  it  advisable  to  return,  we  will  take  counsel 
together.  If  the  Columbiad  is  not  there,  the  projectile 
will  be." 

"  That  is  a  step  certainly.     A  ball  without  a  gun !  " 

"  The  gun,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  can  be  manufactured. 
The  powder  can  be  made.  Neither  metals,  saltpetre,  nor 
coal  can  fail  in  the  depths  of  the  moon,  and  we  need  only 
go  8,000  leagues  in  order  to  fall  upon  the  terrestrial  globe 
by  virtue  of  the  mere  laws  of  weight." 

"  Enough,"  said  Michel  with  animation.  "  Let  it  be 
no  longer  a  question  of  returning;  we  have  already  enter- 
tained it  too  long.  As  to  communicating  with  our  for- 
mer earthly  colleagues,  that  will  not  be  difficult." 

"And  how?  " 

"  By  means  of  meteors  launched  by  lunar  volcanoes." 

"  Well  thought  of,  Michel,"  said  Barbicane  in  a  con- 
vinced tone  of  voice.  "  Laplace  has  calculated  that  a  force 
five  times  greater  than  that  of  our  gun  would  suffice  to  send 
a  meteor  from  the  moon  to  the  earth,  and  there  is  not  one 
volcano  which  has  not  a  greater  power  of  propulsion  than 
that." 

"  Hurrah !  "  exclaimed  Michel ;  "  these  meteors  are  handy 
postmen,  and  cost  nothing.  And  how  we  shall  be  able  to 
laugh  at  the  post-office  administration.  But  now  I  think 
of  it-—" 


A  MOMENT  OF  INTOXICATION  291 

"  What  do  you  think  of  ?  " 

"A  capital  idea.  Why  did  we  not  fasten  a  thread  to 
our  projectile,  and  we  could  have  exchanged  telegrams 
with  the  earth?" 

"  The  deuce !  "  answered  Nicholl.  "  Do  you  consider 
the  weight  of  a  thread  250,000  miles  long  nothing?" 

"  As  nothing.  They  could  have  trebled  the  Columbiad's 
charge ;  they  could  have  quadrupled  or  quintupled  it !  " 
exclaimed  Michel,  with  whom  the  verb  took  a  higher  in- 
tonation each  time. 

"  There  is  but  one  little  objection  to  make  to  your  prop- 
osition," replied  Barbicane,  "  which  is  that,  during  the  ro- 
tary motion  of  the  globe,  our  thread  would  have  wound  it- 
self round  it  like  a  chain  on  a  capstan,  and  that  it  would 
inevitably  have  brought  us  to  the  ground." 

"  By  the  thirty-nine  stars  of  the  Union ! "  said  Michel, 
"  I  have  nothing  but  impracticable  ideas  to-day ;  ideas 
worthy  of  J.  T.  Maston.  But  I  have  a  notion  that,  if  we 
do  not  return  to  earth,  J.  T.  Maston  will  be  able  to  come 
to  us." 

"Yes,  he'll  come,"  replied  Barbicane;  "he  is  a  worthy 
and  a  courageous  comrade.  Besides,  what  is  easier?  Is 
not  the  Columbiad  still  buried  in  the  soil  of  Florida?  Is 
cotton  and  nitric  acid  wanted  wherewith  to  manufacture 
the  pyroxyle?  Will  not  the  moon  again  pass  to  the  zenith 
of  Florida?  In  eighteen  years'  time  will  she  not  occupy 
exactly  the  same  place  as  to-day?  " 

"  Yes,"  continued  Michel,  "  yes,  Maston  will  come,  and 
with  him  our  friends  Elphinstone,  Blomsberry,  all  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Gun  Club,  and  they  will  be  well  received.  And 
by  and  by  they  will  run  trains  of  projectiles  between  the 
earth  and  the  moon !     Hurrah  for  J.  T.  Maston !  " 

It  is  probable  that  if  the  Hon.  J.  T.  Maston  did  not 
hear  the  hurrahs  uttered  in  his  honor,  his  ears  at  least 
tingled.  What  was  he  doing  then?  Doubtless  posted  in 
the  Rocky  Mountains,  at  the  station  of  Long's  Peak,  he 
was  trying  to  find  the  invisible  projectile  gravitating  in 
space.  If  he  was  thinking  of  his  dear  companions,  we 
must  allow  that  they  were  not  far  behind  him;  and  that, 
under  the  influence  of  a  strange  excitement,  they  were  de- 
voting to  him  their  best  thoughts. 

But  whence  this  excitement,  which  was  evidently  grow- 


292  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

ing  upon  the  tenants  of  the  projectile?  Their  sobriety 
could  not  be  doubted.  This  strange  irritation  of  the  brain, 
must  it  be  attributed  to  the  peculiar  circumstances  under 
which  they  found  themselves,  to  their  proximity  to  the 
orb  of  night,  from  which  only  a  few  hours  separated  them, 
to  some  secret  influence  of  the  moon  acting  upon  their 
nervous  system?  Their  faces  were  as  rosy  as  if  they  had 
been  exposed  to  the  roaring  flames  of  an  oven ;  their  voices 
resounded  in  loud  accents;  their  words  escaped  like  a 
champagne  cork  driven  out  by  carbonic  acid;  their  ges- 
tures became  annoying,  they  wanted  so  much  room  to  per- 
form them ;  and,  strange  to  say,  they  none  of  them  noticed 
this  great  tension  of  the  mind. 

"  Now,"  said  Nicholl,  in  a  short  tone,  "  now  that  I  do 
not  know  whether  we  shall  ever  return  from  the  moon,  I 
want  to  know  what  we  are  going  to  do  there?  " 

"  What  are  we  going  to  do  there  ?  "  replied  Barbicane, 
stamping  with  his  foot  as  if  he  was  in  a  fencing  saloon; 
■  "  I  do  not  know." 

"You  do  not  know!"  exclaimed  Michel,  with  a  bellow 
which  provoked  a  sonorous  echo  in  the  projectile. 

"  No,  I  have  not  even  thought  about  it,"  retorted  Barbi- 
cane, in  the  same  loud  tone. 

"  Well,  I  know,"  replied  Michel. 

"  Speak,  then,"  cried  Nicholl,  who  could  no  longer  con- 
tain the  growling  of  his  voice. 

"  I  shall  speak  if  it  suits  me,"  exclaimed  Michel,  seizing 
his  companions'  arms  with  violence. 

"  It  must  suit  you,"  said  Barbicane,  with  an  eye  on 
fire  and  a  threatening  hand.  "It  was  you  who  drew  us 
into  this  frightful  journey,  and  we  want  to  know  what  for." 

"Yes,"  said  the  captain,  "now  that  I  do  ^  not  know 
where  I  am  going,  I  want  to  know  why  I  am  going." 

"Why?"  exclaimed  Michel,  jumping  ^  a  yard  high, 
"why?  To  take  possession  of  the  moon  in  the  name  of 
the  United  States;  to  add  a  fortieth  State  to  the  Union;  to 
colonize  the  lunar  regions;  to  cultivate  them,  to  people 
them,  to  transport  thither  all  the  prodigies  of  art,  of  science, 
and  industry ;  to  civilize  the  Selenites,  unless  they  are  more 
civilized  than  we  are;  and  to  constitute  them  a  republic, 
if  they  are  not  already  one!  " 

"And  if  there  are  no  Selenites?  "  retorted  Nicholl,  who, 


A  MOMENT  OF  INTOXICATION  293 

under  the  influence  of  this  unaccountable  intoxication,  was 
very  contradictory. 

"Who  said  that  there  were  no  Selenites?"  exclaimed 
Michel  in  a  threatening  tone. 

"  I  do,"  howled  Nicholl. 

"  Captain,"  said  Michel,  "  do  not  repeat  that  insolence, 
or  I  will  knock  your  teeth  down  your  throat ! " 

The  two  adversaries  were  going  to  fall  upon  each  other, 
and  the  incoherent  discussion  threatened  to  merge  into  a 
fight,  when  Barbicane  intervened  with  one  bound. 

"  Stop,  miserable  men,"  said  he,  separating  his  two  com- 
panions; "if  there  are  no  Selenites,  we  will  do  without 
them." 

"  Yes,"  exclaimed  Michel,  who  was  not  particular ;  "  yes, 
we  will  do  without  them.  We  have  only  to  make  Selenites. 
Down  with  the  Selenites !  " 

"  The  empire  of  the  moon  belongs  to  us,"  said  Nicholl. 
"  Let  us  three  constitute  the  republic." 

"  I  will  be  the  congress,"  cried  Michel. 

"And  I  the  senate,"  retorted  Nicholl. 

"  And  Barbicane,  the  president,"  howled  Michel. 

"  Not  a  president  elected  by  the  nation,"  replied  Barbi- 
cane. 

"  Very  well,  a  president  elected  by  the  congress,"  cried 
Michel ;  "  and  as  I  am  the  congress,  you  are  unanimously 
elected ! " 

"  Hurrah !  hurrah !  hurrah !  for  President  Barbicane/' 
exclaimed  Nicholl. 

"  Hip!  hip!  hip!  "  vociferated  Michel  Ardan. 

Then  the  president  and  the  senate  struck  up  in  a  tre- 
mendous voice  the  popular  song  "  Yankee  Doodle,"  whilst 
from  the  congress  resounded  the  masculine  tones  of  the 
"  Marseillaise." 

Then  they  struck  up  a  frantic  dance,  with  maniacal 
gestures,  idiotic  stampings,  and  somersaults  like  those  of 
the  boneless  clowns  in  the  circus.  Diana,  joining  in  the 
dance,  and  howling  in  her  turn,  jumped  to  the  top  of  the 
projectile. 

An  unaccountable  flapping  of  wings  was  then  heard 
amidst  most  fantastic  cock-crows  while  five  or  six  hens 
fluttered  like  bats  against  the  walls. 

Then  the  three  traveling  companions,   acted  upon  by 


294  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

some  unaccountable  influence  above  that  of  intoxication, 
inflamed  by  the  air  which  had  set  their  respiratory  ap- 
paratus on  fire,  fell  motionless  to  the  bottom  of  the  pro- 
jectile. 

CHAPTER   VIII 

AT    SEVENTY-EIGHT   THOUSAND   FIVE   HUNDRED   AND   FOUR- 
TEEN LEAGUES 

What  had  happened?  Whence  the  cause  of  this  sin- 
gular intoxication,  the  consequences  of  which  might  have 
been  very  disastrous?  A  simple  blunder  of  Michel's, 
which,  fortunately,  Nicholl  was  able  to  correct  in  time. 

After  a  perfect  swoon,  which  lasted  some  minutes,  the 
captain,  recovering  first,  soon  collected  his  scattered  senses. 
Although  he  had  breakfasted  only  two  hours  before,  he 
felt  a  gnawing  hunger,  as  if  he  had  not  eaten  anything  for 
several  days.  Everything  about  him,  stomach  and  brain, 
were  overexcited  to  the  highest  degree.  He  got  up  and 
demanded  from  Michel  a  supplementary  repast.  Michel, 
utterly  done  up,  did  not  answer. 

Nicholl  then  tried  to  prepare  some  tea,  destined  to  help 
the  absorption  of  a  dozen  sandwiches.  He  first  tried  to 
get  some  fire,  and  struck  a  match  sharply.  What  was  his 
surprise  to  see  the  sulphur  shine  with  so  extraordinary  a 
brilliancy  as  to  be  almost  unbearable  to  the  eye.  From 
the  gas-burner  which  he  lit  rose  a  flame  equal  to  a  jet  of 
electric  light. 

A  revelation  dawned  on  Nicholl's  mind.  That  inten- 
sity of  light,  the  physiological  troubles  which  had  arisen  in 
him,  the  overexcitement  of  all  his  moral  and  quarrelsome 
faculties, — he  understood  all. 

"  The  oxygen !  "  he  exclaimed. 

And  leaning  over  the  air  apparatus,  he  saw  that  the  tap 
was  allowing  the  scentless,  colorless  gas  to  escape  freely, 
life-giving,  but  in  its  pure  state  producing  the  gravest  dis- 
orders in  the  system.  Michel  had  blunderingly  opened  the 
tap  of  the  apparatus  to  the  full. 

Nicholl  hastened  to  stop  the  escape  of  oxygen  with 
which  the  atmosphere  was  saturated,  which  would  have 
been  the  death  of  the  travelers,  not  by  suffocation,  but  by 
combustion.     An  hour  later,  the  air  less  charged  with  it 


SEVENTY-EIGHT  THOUSAND  LEAGUES     295 

restored  the  lungs  to  their  normal  condition.  By  degrees 
the  three  friends  recovered  from  their  intoxication;  but 
they  were  obliged  to  sleep  themselves  sober  over  their  oxy- 
gen, as  a  drunkard  does  over  his  wine. 

When  Michel  learned  his  share  of  the  responsibility  of 
this  incident,  he  was  not  much  disconcerted.  This  unex- 
pected drunkenness  broke  the  monotony  of  the  journey. 
Many  foolish  things  had  been  said  while  under  its  in- 
fluence, but  also  quickly  forgotten. 

"And  then,"  added  the  merry  Frenchman,  "I  am  not 
sorry  to  have  tasted  a  little  of  this  heady  gas.  Do  you 
know,  my  friends,  that  a  curious  establishment  might  be 
founded  with  rooms  of  oxygen,  where  people  whose  sys- 
tem is  weakened  could  for  a  few  hours  live  a  more  active 
life.  Fancy  parties  where  the  room  was  saturated  with 
this  heroic  fluid,  theaters  where  it  should  be  kept  at  high 
pressure;  what  passion  in  the  souls  of  the  actors  and  spec- 
tators! what  fire,  what  enthusiasm!  And  if  instead  of  an 
assembly  only  a  whole  people  could  be  saturated,  what 
activity  in  its  functions,  what  a  supplement  to  life  it  would 
derive.  From  an  exhausted  nation  they  might  make  a 
great  and  strong  one,  and  I  know  more  than  one  state  in 
old  Europe  which  ought  to  put  itself  under  the  regime  of 
oxygen  for  the  sake  of  its  health !  " 

Michel  spoke  with  so  much  animation,  that  one  might 
have  fancied  that  the  tap  was  still  too  open.  But  a  few 
words  from  Barbicane  soon  scattered  his  enthusiasm. 

"That  is  all  very  well,  friend  Michel,"  said  he,  "but 
will  you  inform  us  where  these  chickens  came  from  which 
have  mixed  themselves  up  in  our  concert?  " 

"  Those  chickens  ?  " 

"Yes." 

Indeed,  half  a  dozen  chickens  and  a  fine  cock  were  walk- 
ing about,  flapping  their  wings  and  chattering. 

"Ah,  the  awkward  things!"  exclaimed  Michel.  "The 
oxygen  has  made  them  revolt." 

"But  what  do  you  want  to  do  with  these  chickens?" 
asked  Barbicane. 

"  To  acclimatize  them  in  the  moon,  by  Jove !  " 

"  Then  why  did  you  hide  them?  " 

"  A  joke,  my  worthy  president,  a  simple  joke,  which  has 
proved  a  miserable  failure.     I  wanted  to  set  them  free  on 


296  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

the  lunar  continent,  without  saying  anything.  Oh,  what 
would  have  been  your  amazement  on  seeing  these  earthly- 
winged  animals  pecking  in  the  lunar  fields!  " 

"  You  rascal,  you  unmitigated  rascal,"  replied  Barbi- 
cane,  "  you  do  not  want  oxygen  to  mount  to  the  head.  You 
are  always  what  we  were  under  the  influence  of  the  gas; 
you  are  always  foolish !  " 

"Ah,  who  says  that  we  were  not  wise  then?"  replied 
Michel  Ardan. 

After  this  philosophical  reflection,  the  three  friends  set 
about  restoring  the  order  of  the  projectile.  Chickens  and 
cock  were  reinstated  in  their  coop.  But  whilst  proceeding 
with  this  operation,  Barbicane  and  his  two  companions 
had  a  most  desired  perception  of  a  new  phenomenon. 
From  the  moment  of  leaving  the  earth,  their  own  weight, 
that  of  the  projectile,  and  the  objects  it  enclosed,  had  been 
subject  to  an  increasing  diminution.  If  they  could  not 
prove  this  loss  of  the  projectile,  a  moment  would  arrive 
when  it  would  be  sensibly  felt  upon  themselves  and  the 
utensils  and  instruments  they  used. 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  a  scale  would  not  show  this 
loss ;  for  the  weight  destined  to  weigh  the  object  would  have 
lost  exactly  as  much  as  the  object  itself;  but  a  spring  steel- 
yard for  example,  the  tension  of  which  was  independent 
of  the  attraction,  would  have  given  a  just  estimate  of  this 
loss. 

We  know  that  the  attraction,  otherwise  called  the  weight, 
is  in  proportion  to  the  densities  of  bodies,  and  inversely 
as  the  squares  of  the  distances.  Hence  this  effect:  If  the 
earth  had  been  alone  in  space,  if  the  other  celestial  bodies 
had  been  suddenly  annihilated,  the  projectile,  according  to 
Newton's  laws,  would  weigh  less  as  it  got  further  from  the 
earth,  but  without  ever  losing  its  weight  entirely,  for  the 
terrestrial  attraction  would  always  have  made  itself  felt, 
at  whatever  distance. 

But,  in  reality,  a  time  must  come  when  the  projectile 
would  no  longer  be  subject  to  the  law  of  weight,  after  al- 
lowing for  the  other  celestial  bodies  whose  effect  could 
not  be  set  down  as  zero.  Indeed,  the  projectile's  course 
was  being  traced  between  the  earth  and  the  moon.  As  it 
distanced  the  earth,  the  terrestrial  attraction  diminished; 
but  the  lunar  attraction  rose  in  proportion.     There  must 


SEVENTY-EIGHT  THOUSAND  LEAGUES     297 

then  come  a  point  where  these  two  attractions  would 
neutralize  each  other;  the  projectile  would  possess  weight 
no  longer.  If  the  moon's  and  the  earth's  densities  had 
been  equal,  this  point  would  have  been  at  an  equal  distance 
between  the  two  orbs.  But  taking  the  different  densities 
into  consideration,  it  was  easy  to  reckon  that  this  point 
would  be  situated  at  47-6oths  of  the  whole  journey,  i.  e. 
at  78,114  leagues  from  the  earth.  At  this  point,  a  body 
having  no  principle  of  speed  or  displacement  in  itself, 
would  remain  immovable  forever,  being  attracted  equally 
by  both  orbs,  and  not  being  drawn  more  towards  one  than 
towards  the  other. 

Now  if  the  projectile's  impulsive  force  had  been  cor- 
rectly calculated,  it  would  attain  this  point  without  speed, 
having  lost  all  trace  of  weight,  as  well  as  all  the  objects 
within  it.  What  would  happen  then?  Three  hypotheses 
presented  themselves. 

1.  Either  it  would  retain  a  certain  amount  of  motion, 
and  pass  the  point  of  equal  attraction,  and  fall  upon  the 
moon  by  virtue  of  the  excess  of  the  lunar  attraction  over 
the  terrestrial. 

2.  Or,  its  speed  failing,  and  unable  to  reach  the  point 
of  equal  attraction,  it  would  fall  back  to  earth  by  virtue  of 
the  excess  of  the  terrestrial  attraction  over  the  lunar. 

3.  Or,  lastly,  animated  with  sufficient  speed  to  enable 
it  to  reach  the  neutral  point,  but  not  sufficient  to  pass  it, 
it  would  remain  forever  suspended  in  that  spot  like  the 
pretended  tomb  of  Mahomet,  between  the  zenith  and  the 
nadir. 

Such  was  their  situation;  and  Barbicane  clearly  ex- 
plained the  consequences  to  his  traveling  companions, 
which  greatly  interested  them.  But  how  should  they 
know  when  the  projectile  had  reached  this  neutral  point 
situated  at  that  distance,  especially  when  neither  them- 
selves, nor  the  objects  enclosed  in  the  projectile,  would  be 
any  longer  subject  to  the  laws  of  weight? 

Up  to  this  time,  the  travelers,  whilst  admitting  that  this 
action  was  constantly  decreasing,  had  not  yet  become  sen- 
sible to  its  total  absence. 

But  that  day,  about  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
Nicholl  having  accidentally  let  a  glass  slip  from  his  hand, 
the  glass,  instead  of  falling,  remained  suspended  in  the  air. 


298  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"Ah!"  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan,  "that  is  rather  an 
amusing  piece  of  natural  philosophy." 

And  immediately  divers  other  objects,  firearms  and  bot- 
tles, abandoned  to  themselves,  held  themselves  up  as  by 
enchantment.  Diana  too,  placed  in  space  by  Michel,  re- 
produced, but  without  any  trick,  the  wonderful  suspension 
practiced  by  Caston  and  Robert  Houdin !  Indeed  the  dog 
did  not  seem  to  know  that  she  was  floating  in  air. 

The  three  adventurous  companions  were  surprised  and 
stupefied,  despite  their  scientific  reasonings.  They  felt 
themselves  being  carried  into  the  domain  of  wonders !  they 
felt  that  weight  was  really  wanting  to  their  bodies.  If 
they  stretched  out  their  arms,  they  did  not  attempt  to  fall. 
Their  heads  shook  on  their  shoulders.  Their  feet  no 
longer  clung  to  the  floor  of  the  projectile.  They  were  like 
drunken  men  having  no  stability  in  themselves. 

Fancy  has  depicted  men  without  reflection,  others  with- 
out shadow.  But  here  reality,  by  the  neutralization  of  at- 
tractive forces,  produced  men  in  whom  nothing  had  any 
weight,  and  who  weighed  nothing  themselves. 

Suddenly  Michel,  taking  a  spring,  left  the  floor  and  re- 
mained suspended  in  the  air,  like  Murillo's  monk  of  the 
Cusine  des  Anges. 

The  two  friends  joined  him  instantly,  and  all  three 
formed  a  miraculous  "  Ascension  "  in  the  center  of  the  pro- 
jectile. 

"  Is  it  to  be  believed?  is  it  probable?  is  it  possible?  "  ex- 
claimed Michel;  "and  yet  it  is  so.  Ah!  if  Raphael  had 
seen  us  thus,  what  an  '  Assumption '  he  would  have  thrown 
upon  canvas ! " 

"The  'Assumption'  cannot  last,"  replied  Barbicane. 
"  If  the  projectile  passes  the  neutral  point,  the  lunar  attrac- 
tion will  draw  us  to  the  moon." 

«  The"  ou.r  feet  wil1  be  upon  the  roof>"  replied  Michel. 

"No,"  said  Barbicane,  "because  the  projectile's  center 
of  gravity  is  very  low;  it  will  only  turn  by  degrees." 

"  Then  all  our  portables  will  be  upset  from  top  to  bot- 
tom, that  is  a  fact." 

"Calm  yourself,  Michel,"  replied  Nicholl;  "no  upset  is 
to  be  feared;  not  a  thing  will  move,  for  the  projectile's 
evolution  will  be  imperceptible." 

"Just  so,"   continued   Barbicane;   "  and   when  it  has 


SEVENTY-EIGHT  THOUSAND  LEAGUES     299 

passed  the  point  of  equal  attraction,  its  base,  being  heavier, 
will  draw  it  perpendicularly  to  the  moon ;  but,  in  order  that 
this  phenomenon  should  take  place,  we  must  have  passed 
the  neutral  line." 

"Pass  the  neutral  line!"  cried  Michel;  "then  let  us  do 
as  the  sailors  do  when  they  cross  the  equator." 

A  slight  side  movement  brought  Michel  back  towards 
the  padded  side;  thence  he  took  a  bottle  and  glasses, 
placed  them  "  in  space  "  before  his  companions,  and,  drink- 
ing merrily,  they  saluted  the  line  with  a  triple  hurrah.  The 
influence  of  these  attractions  scarcely  lasted  an  hour;  the 
travelers  felt  themselves  insensibly  drawn  towards  the 
floor,  and  Barbicane  fancied  that  the  conical  end  of  the 
projectile  was  varying  a  little  from  its  normal  direction 
towards  the  moon.  By  an  inverse  motion  the  base  was 
approaching  first;  the  lunar  attraction  was  prevailing  over 
the  terrestrial;  the  fall  towards  the  moon  was  beginning, 
almost  imperceptibly  as  yet,  but  by  degrees  the  attractive 
force  would  become  stronger,  the  fall  would  be  more  de- 
cided, the  projectile  drawn  by  its  base,  would  turn  its  cone 
to  the  earth,  and  fall  with  ever-increasing  speed  onto  the 
surface  of  the  Selenite  continent;  their  destination  would 
then  be  attained.  Now  nothing  could  prevent  the  success 
of  their  enterprise,  and  Nicholl  and  Michel  Ardan  shared 
Barbicane's  joy. 

Then  they  chatted  of  all  the  phenomena  which  had  as- 
tonished them  one  after  the  other,  particularly  the  neu- 
tralization of  the  laws  of  weight.  Michel  Ardan,  always 
enthusiastic,  drew  conclusions  which  were  purely  fanciful. 

"  Ah,  my  worthy  friends,"  he  exclaimed,  "  what  progress 
we  should  make  if  on  earth  we  could  throw  off  some  of 
that  weight,  some  of  that  chain  which  binds  us  to  her;  it 
would  be  the  prisoner  set  at  liberty;  no  more  fatigue  of 
either  arms  or  legs.  Or,  if  it  is  true  that  in  order  to  fly 
on  the  earth's  surface,  to  keep  oneself  suspended  in  the  air 
merely  by  the  play  of  the  muscles,  there  requires  a  strength 
a  hundred  and  fifty  times  greater  than  that  which  we 
possess,  a  simple  act  of  volition,  a  caprice,  would  bear  us 
into  space,  if  attraction  did  not  exist." 

"Just  so,"  said  Nicholl,  smiling;  "if  we  could  succeed 
in  suppressing  weight  as  they  suppress  pain  by  anaesthesia, 
that  would  change  the  face  of  modern  society !  " 


300  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"  Yes,"  cried  Michel,  full  of  his  subject,  "  destroy 
weight,  and  no  more  burdens ! " 

"  Well  said,"  replied  Barbicane ;  "  but  if  nothing  had  any 
weight,  nothing  would  keep  in  its  place,  not  even  your  hat 
on  your  head,  worthy  Michel;  nor  your  house,  whose 
stones  only  adhere  by  weight;  not  a  boat,  whose  stability 
on  the  water  is  caused  only  by  weight;  not  even  the  ocean, 
whose  waves  would  no  longer  be  equalized  by  terrestrial 
attraction;  and  lastly,  not  even  the  atmosphere,  whose  at- 
oms, being  no  longer  held  in  their  places,  would  disperse 
in  space ! " 

"  That  is  tiresome,"  retorted  Michel ;  "  nothing  like 
these  matter-of-fact  people  for  bringing  one  back  to  the 
bare  reality." 

"  But  console  yourself,  Michel,"  continued  Barbicane, 
"  for  if  no  orb  exists  from  whence  all  laws  of  weight  are 
banished,  you  are  at  least  going  to  visit  one  where  it  is 
much  less  than  on  the  earth." 

"  The  moon  ?  " 

"Yes,  the  moon,  on  whose  surface  objects  weigh  six 
times  less  than  on  the  earth,  a  phenomenon  which  is  easy 
to  prove." 

"  And  we  shall  feel  it?  "  asked  Michel. 

"  Evidently,  as  200  lbs.  will  only  weigh  30  lbs.  on  the 
surface  of  the  moon." 

"  And  our  muscular  strength  will  not  diminish  ?  " 

"  Not  at  all ;  instead  of  jumping  one  yard  high,  you  will 
rise  eighteen  feet  high." 

"  But  we  shall  be  regular  Herculeses  in  the  moon !  "  ex- 
claimed Michel. 

"Yes,"  replied  Nicholl;  "for  if  the  height  of  the  Sele- 
nites  is  in  proportion  to  the  density  of  their  globe,  they 
wll  be  scarcely  a  foot  high." 

"  Lilliputians!  "  ejaculated  Michel;  "  I  shall  play  the  part 
of  Gulliver.  We  are  going  to  realize  the  fable  of  the 
giants.  This  is  the  advantage  of  leaving  one's  own  planet 
and  overrunning  the  solar  world." 

"  One  moment,  Michel,"  answered  Barbicane ;  "  if  you 
wish  to  play  the  part  of  Gulliver,  only  visit  the  interior 
planets,  such  as  Mercury,  Venus,  or  Mars,  whose  density 
is  a  little  less  than  that  of  the  earth;  but  do  not  venture 
into  the  great  planets,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Uranus,  Neptune; 


SEVENTY-EIGHT  THOUSAND  LEAGUES     301 

for  there  the  order  will  be  changed,  and  you  will  become 
Lilliputian." 

"And  in  the  sun?" 

"  In  the  sun,  if  its  density  is  thirteen  hundred  and  twenty- 
four  thousand  times  greater,  and  the  attraction  is  twenty- 
seven  times  greater  than  on  the  surface  of  our  globe,  keep- 
ing everything  in  proportion,  the  inhabitants  ought  to  be 
at  least  two  hundred  feet  high." 

"  By  Jove ! "  exclaimed  Michel ;  "  I  should  be  nothing 
more  than  a  pigmy,  a  shrimp !  " 

"  Gulliver  with  the  giants,"  said  Nicholl. 

"Just  so,"  replied  Barbicane. 

"  And  it  would  not  be  quite  useless  to  carry  some  pieces 
of  artillery  to  defend  oneself." 

"Good,"  replied  Nicholl;  "your  projectiles  would  have 
no  effect  on  the  sun;  they  would  fall  flat  on  its  surface  al- 
most instantly." 

"That  is  a  strong  remark." 

"  It  is  certain,"  replied  Barbicane ;  "  the  attraction  is  so 
great  on  this  enormous  orb,  that  an  object  weighing 
but  1,920  lbs.  on  the  earth  would  weigh  70,000  lbs.  on  the 
surface  of  the  sun.  If  you  were  to  fall  upon  it  you  would 
weigh — let  me  see — about  5,000  lbs.,  a  weight  which  you 
would  never  be  able  to  raise  again." 

"  The  devil! "  said  Michel;  "  one  would  want  a  portable 
crane.  However,  we  will  be  satisfied  with  the  moon  for 
the  present ;  there  at  least  we  shall  cut  a  great  figure.  We 
will  see  about  the  sun  by  and  by." 


CHAPTER  IX 

THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  A  DEVIATION 

Barbicane  had  now  no  fear  of  the  issue  of  the  journey, 
at  least  as  far  as  the  projectile's  impulsive  force  was  con- 
cerned; its  own  speed  would  carry  it  beyond  the  neutral 
line;  it  would  certainly  not  return  to  earth;  it  would  cer- 
tainly not  remain  motionless  on  the  line  of  attraction.  One 
single  hypothesis  remained  to  be  realized,  the  arrival  of 
the  projectile  at  its  destination  by  the  action  of  the  lunar 
attraction. 

It  was  in  reality  a  fall  of  8,296  leagues  on  an  orb,  it  is 


302  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

true,  where  weight  could  only  be  reckoned  at  one-sixth  of 
terrestrial  weight;  a  formidable  fall,  nevertheless,  and  one 
against  which  every  precaution  must  be  taken  without  de- 
lay. 

These  precautions  were  of  two  sorts,  some  to  deaden 
the  shock  when  the  projectile  should  touch  the  lunar  soil, 
others  to  delay  the  fall,  and  consequently  make  it  less 
violent. 

To  deaden  the  shock,  it  was  a  pity  that  Barbicane  was 
no  longer  able  to  employ  the  means  which  had  so  ably 
weakened  the  shock  at  departure,  that  is  to  say,  by  water 
used  as  springs  and  the  partition-breaks. 

The  partitions  still  existed  but  water  failed,  for  they 
could  not  use  their  reserve,  which  was  precious,  in  case 
during  the  first  days  the  liquid  element  should  be  found 
wanting  on  lunar  soil. 

And  indeed  this  reserve  would  have  been  quite  insuf- 
ficient for  a  spring.  The  layer  of  water  stored  in  the  pro- 
jectile at  their  departure,  and  on  which  the  waterproof  disc 
lay,  occupied  no  less  than  three  feet  in  depth,  and  spread 
over  a  surface  of  not  less  than  fifty-four  square  feet.  Be- 
sides, the  cistern  did  not  contain  one-fifth  part  of  it;  they 
must  therefore  give  up  this  efficient  means  of  deadening 
the  shock  of  arrival.  Happily,  Barbicane,  not  content 
with  employing  water,  had  furnished  the  movable  disc  with 
strong  spring  plugs,  destined  to  lessen  the  shock  against 
the  base  after  the  breaking  of  the  horizontal  partitions. 
These  plugs  still  existed;  they  had  only  to  readjust  them 
and  replace  the  movable  disc;  every  piece,  easy  to  handle, 
as  their  weight  was  now  scarcely  felt,  was  quickly  mounted. 

The  different  pieces  were  fitted  without  trouble,  it  being 
only  a  matter  of  bolts  and  screws;  tools  were  not  wanting, 
and  soon  the  reinstated  disc  lay  on  its  steel  plugs,  like  a 
table  on  its  legs.  One  inconvenience  resulted  from  the  re- 
placing of  the  disc,  the  lower  window  was  blocked  up; 
thus  it  was  impossible  for  the  travelers  to  observe  the  moon 
from  that  opening  while  they  were  being  precipitated  per- 
pendicularly upon  her ;  but  they  were  obliged  to  give  it  up ; 
even  by  the  side  openings  they  could  still  see  vast  lunar 
regions,  as  an  aeronaut  sees  the  earth  from  his  car. 

This  replacing  of  the  disc  was  at  least  an  hour's  work. 
It  was  past  twelve  when  all  preparations  were  finished. 


THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  A  DEVIATION  303 

Barbicane  took  fresh  observations  on  the  inclination  of  the 
projectile,  but  to  his  annoyance  it  had  not  turned  over  suf- 
ficiently for  its  fall;  it  seemed  to  take  a  curve  parallel  to 
the  lunar  disc.  The  orb  of  night  shone  splendidly  into 
space,  whilst,  opposite,  the  orb  of  day  blazed  with  fire. 

Their  situation  began  to  make  them  uneasy. 

'Are  we  reaching  our  destination?"  said  Nicholl. 

"Let  us  act  as  if  we  were  about  reaching  it,"  replied 
Barbicane. 

"  You  are  skeptical,"  retorted  Michel  Ardan.  "  We  shall 
arrive,  and  that,  too,  quicker  than  we  like." 

This  answer  brought  Barbicane  back  to  his  preparations, 
and  he  occupied  himself  with  placing  the  contrivances  in- 
tended to  break. their  descent.  We  may  remember  the 
scene  of  the  meeting  held  at  Tampa  Town,  in  Florida, 
when  Captain  Nicholl  came  forward,  Barbicane's  enemy 
and  Michel  Ardan's  adversary.  To  Captain  Nicholl's 
maintaining  that  the  projectile  would  smash  like  glass, 
Michel  replied  that  he  would  break  their  fall  by  means  of 
rockets  properly  placed. 

Thus,  powerful  fireworks,  taking  their  starting-point 
from  the  base  and  bursting  outside,  could,  by  producing  a  re- 
coil, check  to  a  certain  degree  the  projectile's  speed.  These 
rockets  were  to  burn  in  space,  it  is  true ;  but  oxygen  would 
not  fail  them,  for  they  could  supply  themselves  with  it  like 
the  lunar  volcanoes,  the  burning  of  which  has  never  yet 
been  stopped  by  the  want  of  atmosphere  round  the  moon. 

Barbicane  had  accordingly  supplied  himself  with  these 
fireworks,  enclosed  in  little  steel  guns,  which  could  be 
screwed  onto  the  base  of  the  projectile.  Inside,  these 
guns  were  flush  with  the  bottom;  outside,  they  protruded 
about  eighteen  inches.  There  were  twenty  of  them.  An 
opening  left  in  the  disc  allowed  them  to  light  the  match 
with  which  each  was  provided.  All  the  effect  was  felt 
outside.  The  burning  mixture  had  been  already  rammed 
into  each  gun.  They  had,  then,  nothing  to  do  but  to  raise 
the  metallic  buffers  fixed  in  the  base,  and  replace  them  by 
the  guns  which  fitted  closely  in  their  places. 

This  new  work  was  finished  about  three  o'clock,  and 
after  taking  all  these  precautions  there  remained  but  to 
wait.  But  the  projectile  was  perceptibly  nearing  the  moon, 
and  evidently  succumbed  to  her  influence  to  a  certain  de- 


304  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

gree;  though  its  own  velocity  also  drew  it  in  an  oblique 
direction.  From  these  conflicting  influences  resulted  a 
line  which  might  become  a  tangent.  But  it  was  certain 
that  the  projectile  would  not  fall  directly  on  the  moon; 
for  its  lower  part,  by  reason  of  its  weight,  ought  to  be 
turned  towards  her. 

Barbicane's  uneasiness  increased  as  he  saw  his  projectile 
resist  the  influence  of  gravitation.  The  Unknown  was 
opening  before  him,  the  Unknown  in  interplanetary  space. 
The  man  of  science  thought  he  had  foreseen  the  only  three 
hypotheses  possible — the  return  to  the  earth,  the  return  to 
the  moon,  or  stagnation  on  the  neutral  line;  and  here  a 
fourth  hypothesis,  big  with  all  the  terrors  of  the  Infinite, 
surged  up  inopportunely.  To  face  it  without  flinching,  one 
must  be  a  resolute  savant  like  Barbicane,  a  phlegmatic 
being  like  Nicholl,  or  an  audacious  adventurer  like  Michel 
Ardan. 

Conversation  was  started  upon  this  subject.  Other  men 
would  have  considered  the  question  from  a  practical  point 
of  view;  they  would  have  asked  themselves  whither  their 
projectile  carriage  was  carrying  them.  Not  so  with  these; 
they  sought  for  the  cause  which  produced  this  effect. 

"  So  we  have  become  diverted  from  our  route,"  said 
Michel;  "but  why?" 

"  I  very  much  fear,"  answered  Nicholl,  "  that,  in  spite  of 
all  precautions  taken,  the  Columbiad  was  not  fairly  pointed. 
An  error,  however  small,  would  be  enough  to  throw  us  out 
of  the  moon's  attraction." 

"  Then  they  must  have  aimed  badly?  "  asked  Michel. 

"  I  do  not  think  so,"  replied  Barbicane.  "  The  perpendic- 
ularity of  the  gun  was  exact,  its  direction  to  the  zenith  of 
the  spot  incontestible ;  and  the  moon  passing  to  the  zenith 
of  the  spot,  we  ought  to  reach  it  at  the  full.  There  is  an- 
other reason,  but  it  escapes  me." 

"Are  we  not  arriving  too  late?  "  asked  Nicholl. 

"  Too  late?  "  said  Barbicane. 

"Yes,"  continued  Nicholl.  "The  Cambridge  Observa- 
tory's note  says  that  the  transit  ought  to  be  accomplished  in 
ninety-seven  hours  thirteen  minutes  and  twenty  seconds; 
which  means  to  say,  that  sooner  the  moon  will  not  be  at  the 
point  indicated,  and  that  later  it  will  have  passed  it." 

"  True,"  replied  Barbicane.     "  But  we  started  the  ist  of 

V.  Ill  Verne 


THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  A  DEVIATION  305 

December,  at  thirteen  minutes  and  twenty-five  seconds  to 
eleven  at  night ;  and  we  ought  to  arrive  on  the  5  th  at  mid- 
night, at  the  exact  moment  when  the  moon  would  be  full ; 
and  we  are  now  at  the  5th  of  December.  It  is  now  half 
past  three  in  the  evening;  half  past  eight  ought  to  see  us  at 
the  end  of  our  journey.     Why  do  we  not  arrive?  " 

"  Might  it  not  be  an  excess  of  speed?  "  answered  Nicholl; 
"  for  we  know  now  that  its  initial  velocity  was  greater  than 
they  supposed." 

"  No !  a  hundred  times,  No !  "  replied  Barbicane.  "  An 
excess  of  speed,  if  the  direction  of  the  projectile  had  been 
right,  would  not  have  prevented  us  reaching  the  moon.  No, 
there  has  been  a  deviation.  We  have  been  turned  out  of 
our  course." 

"  By  whom?  by  what?  "  asked  Nicholl. 

"  I  cannot  say,"  replied  Barbicane. 

"  Very  well,  then,  Barbicane,"  said  Michel,  "  do  you  wish 
to  know  my  opinion  on  the  subject  of  finding  out  this  devia- 
tion?" 

"  Speak." 

*■  I  would  not  give  half  a  dollar  to  know  it.  That  we 
have  deviated  is  a  fact.  Where  we  are  going  to  matters 
little ;  we  shall  soon  see.  Since  we  are  being  borne  along  in 
space  we  shall  land  by  falling  into  some  center  of  attraction 
or  other." 

Michel  Ardan's  indifference  did  not  content  Barbicane. 
Not  that  he  was  uneasy  about  the  future,  but  he  wanted  to 
know  at  any  cost  why  his  projectile  had  deviated. 

But  the  projectile  continued  its  course  sideways  to  the 
moon,  and  with  it  the  mass  of  things  thrown  out.  Barbi- 
cane could  even  prove,  by  the  elevations  which  served  as 
landmarks  upon  the  moon,  which  was  only  2,000  leagues 
distant,  that  its  speed  was  becoming  uniform — fresh  proof 
that  there  was  no  fall.  Its  impulsive  force  still  prevailed 
over  the  lunar  attraction,  but  the  projectile's  course  was 
certainly  bringing  it  nearer  to  the  moon,  and  they  might 
hope  that  at  a  nearer  point  the  weight,  predominating,  would 
cause  a  decided  fall. 

The  three  friends,  having  nothing  better  to  do,  continued 
their  observations;  but  they  could  not  yet  determine  the 
topographical  position  of  the  satellite;  every  relief  was 
leveled  under  the  reflection  of  the  solar  rays. 


306  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

They  watched  thus  through  the  side  windows  until  eight 
o'clock  at  night.  The  moon  had  then  grown  so  large  in 
their  eyes  that  it  rilled  half  of  the  firmament.  The  sun  on 
one  side  and  the  orb  of  night  on  the  other,  flooded  the  pro- 
jectile with  light. 

At  that  moment,  Barbicane  thought  he  could  estimate  the 
distance  which  separated  them  from  their  aim  at  no  more 
than  700  leagues.  The  speed  of  the  projectile  seemed  to 
him  to  be  more  than  200  yards  a  second.  Under  the  centri- 
petal force,  the  base  of  the  projectile  tended  towards  the 
moon;  but  the  centrifugal  still  prevailed;  and  it  was  prob- 
able that  its  rectilineal  course  would  be  changed  to  a  curve 
of  some  sort,  the  nature  of  which  they  could  not  at  present 
determine. 

Barbicane  was  still  seeking  the  solution  of  his  insoluble 
problem.  Hours  passed  without  any  result.  The  projec- 
tile was  evidently  nearing  the  moon,  but  it  was  also  evident 
that  it  would  never  reach  her.  As  to  the  nearest  distance 
at  which  it  would  pass  her,  that  must  be  the  result  of  the  two 
forces,  attraction  and  repulsion,  affecting  its  motion. 

"  I  ask  but  one  thing,"  said  Michel ;  "  that  we  may  pass 
near  enough  to  penetrate  her  secrets." 

"  Cursed  be  the  thing  that  has  caused  our  projectile  to 
deviate  from  its  course,"  cried  Nicholl. 

And,  as  if  a  light  had  suddenly  broken  in  upon  his  mind, 
Barbicane  answered,  "Then  cursed  be  the  meteor  which 
crossed  our  path. 

"What?"  said  Michel  Ardan. 

"What  do  you  mean?"  exclaimed  Nicholl. 

"  I  mean,"  said  Barbicane  in  a  decided  tone,  "  I  mean  that 
our  deviation  is  owing  solely  to  our  meeting  with  this  erring 
body." 

"  But  it  did  not  even  brush  us  as  it  passed,"  said  Michel. 

"  What  does  that  matter?  Its  mass,  compared  to  that  of 
our  projectile,  was  enormous,  and  its  attraction  was  enough 
to  influence  our  course." 

"So  little?"  cried  Nicholl. 

"Yes,  Nicholl;  but  however  little  it  might  be,"  replied 
Barbicane,  "  in  a  distance  of  84,000  leagues,  it  wanted  no 
more  to  make  us  miss  the  moon." 


CHAPTER   X 

THE  OBSERVERS  OF  THE  MOON 

Barbicane  had  evidently  hit  upon  the  only  plausible  rea- 
son of  this  deviation.  However  slight  it  might  have  been,  it 
had  sufficed  to  modify  the  course  of  the  projectile.  It  was 
a  fatality.  The  bold  attempt  had  miscarried  by  a  fortu- 
itous circumstance;  and  unless  by  some  exceptional  event, 
they  could  now  never  reach  the  moon's  disc. 

Would  they  pass  near  enough  to  be  able  to  solve  certain 
physical  and  geological  questions  until  then  insoluble?  Thi9 
was  the  question,  and  the  only  one,  which  occupied  the 
minds  of  these  bold  travelers.  As  to  the  fate  in  store  for 
themselves,  they  did  not  even  dream  of  it. 

But  what  would  become  of  them  amid  these  infinite  soli- 
tudes, these  who  would  soon  want  air?  A  few  more  days, 
and  they  would  fall  stifled  in  this  wandering  projectile.  But 
some  days  to  these  intrepid  fellows  was  a  century ;  and  they 
devoted  all  their  time  to  observe  that  moon  which  they  no 
longer  hoped  to  reach. 

The  distance  which  then  separated  the  projectile  from  the 
satellite  was  estimated  at  about  400  leagues.  Under  these 
conditions,  as  regards  the  visibility  of  the  details  of  the  disc, 
the  travelers  were  farther  from  the  moon  than  are  the  in- 
habitants of  the  earth  with  their  powerful  telescopes. 

Indeed,  we  know  that  the  instrument  mounted  by  Lord 
Rosse  at  Parsonstown,  which  magnifies  6,500  times,  brings 
the  moon  to  within  an  apparent  distance  of  sixteen  leagues. 
And  more  than  that,  with  the  powerful  one  set  up  at  Long's 
Peak,  the  orb  of  night,  magnified  48,000  times,  is  brought 
to  within  less  than  two  leagues,  and  objects  having  a  diam- 
eter of  thirty  feet  are  seen  very  distinctly.  So  that,  at  this 
distance,  the  topographical  details  of  the  moon,  observed 
without  glasses,  could  not  be  determined  with  precision. 
The  eye  caught  the  vast  outline  of  those  immense  depres- 
sions inappropriately  called  "  seas,"  but  they  could  not  rec- 
ognize their  nature.  The  prominence  of  the  mountains  dis- 
appeared under  the  splendid  irradiation  produced  by  the  re- 
flection of  the  solar  rays.  The  eye,  dazzled  as  if  it  was 
leaning  over  a  path  of  molten  silver,  turned  from  it  involun- 
tarily ;  but  the  oblong  form  of  the  orb  was  quite  clear.  It 
appeared  like  a  gigantic  egg,  with  the  small  end  turned  to- 
wards the  earth.     Indeed  the  moon,  liquid  and  pliable  in  the 

307 


308  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

first  days  of  its  formation,  was  originally  a  perfect  sphere; 
but,  being  soon  drawn  within  the  attraction  of  the  earth,  it 
became  elongated  under  the  influence  of  gravitation.  In 
becoming  a  satellite,  she  lost  her  native  purity  of  form;  her 
center  of  gravity  was  in  advance  of  the  center  of  her  figure; 
and  from  this  fact  some  savants  draw  the  conclusion  that 
the  air  and  water  had  taken  refuge  on  the  opposite  surface 
of  the  moon,  which  is  never  seen  from  the  earth.  This  al- 
teration in  the  primitive  form  of  the  satellite  was  only  per- 
ceptible for  a  few  moments.  The  distance  of  the  projectile 
from  the  moon  diminished  very  rapidly  under  its  speed, 
though  that  was  much  less  than  its  initial  velocity, — but 
eight  or  nine  times  greater  than  that  which  propels  our  ex- 
press trains.  The  oblique  course  of  the  projectile,  from  its 
very  obliquity,  gave  Michel  Ardan  some  hopes  of  striking 
the  lunar  disc  at  some  point  or  other.  He  could  not  think 
that  they  would  never  reach  it.  No!  he  could  not  believe 
it;  and  this  opinion  he  often  repeated.  But  Barbicane,  who 
was  a  better  judge,  always  answered  him  with  merciless 
logic. 

"No,  Michel,  no!  We  can  only  reach  the  moon  by  a 
fall,  and  we  are  not  falling.  The  centripetal  force  keeps  us 
under  the  moon's  influence,  but  the  centrifugal  force  draws 
us  irresistibly  away  from  it." 

This  was  said  in  a  tone  which  quenched  Michel  Ardan's 
last  hope. 

The  portion  of  the  moon  which  the  projectile  was  neanng 
was  the  northern  hemisphere,  that  which  the  Selenographic 
maps  place  below;  for  these  maps  are  generally  drawn  after 
the  outline  given  by  the  glasses,  and  we  know  that  they  re- 
verse the  objects.  Such  was  the  Map  pa  Selenographica  of 
Boeer  and  Moedler  which  Barbicane  consulted.  This  north- 
ern hemisphere  presented  vast  plains,  dotted  with  isolated 
mountains. 

At  midnight  the  moon  was  full.  At  that  precise  mpment 
the  travelers  should  have  alighted  upon  it,  if  the  mischievous 
meteor  had  not  diverted  their  course.  The  orb  was  exactly 
in  the  condition  determined  by  the  Cambridge  Observatory. 
It  was  mathematically  at  its  perigee,  and  at  the  zenith  of  the 
twenty-eighth  parallel.  An  observer  placed  at  the  bottom 
of  the  enormous  Columbiad  pointed  perpendicularly  to  the 
horizon,  would  have  framed  the  moon  in  the  mouth  of  the 


THE  OBSERVERS  OF  THE  MOON         309 

gun.  A'  straight  line  drawn  through  the  axis  of  the  piece  - 
would  have  passed  through  the  center  of  the  orb  of  night. 
It  is  needless  to  say,  that  during  the  night  of  the  5th-6th  of 
December,  the  travelers  took  not  an  instant's  rest.  Could 
they  close  their  eyes  when  so  near  this  new  world?  No! 
All  their  feelings  were  concentrated  in  one  single  thought: 
— See!  Representatives  of  the  earth,  of  humanity,  past 
and  present,  all  centered  in  them!  It  is  through  their  eyes 
that  the  human  race  look  at  these  lunar  regions,  and  pene- 
trate the  secrets  of  their  satellite!  A  strange  emotion  filled 
their  hearts  as  they  went  from  one  window  to  the  other. 

Their  observations,  reproduced  by  Barbicane,  were 
rigidly  determined.  To  take  them,  they  had  glasses ;  to  cor- 
rect them,  maps. 

As  regards  the  optical  instruments  at  their  disposal,  they 
had  excellent  marine  glasses  specially  constructed  for  this 
journey.  They  possessed  magnifying  powers  pi  100. 
They  would  thus  have  brought  the  moon  to  within  a  dis- 
tance (apparent)  of  less  than  2,000  leagues  from  the  earth. 
But  then,  at  a  distance  which  for  three  hours  in  the  morning 
did  not  exceed  sixty-five  miles,  and  in  a  medium  free  from 
all  atmospheric  disturbances,  these  instruments  could  reduce 
the  lunar  surface  to  within  less  than  1,500  yards! 


CHAPTER   XI 

FANCY  AND  REALITY 

"Have  you  ever  seen  the  moon?"  asked  a  professor, 
ironically,  of  one  of  his  pupils. 

"  No  sir !  "  replied  the  pupil,  still  more  ironically,  "  but  I 
must  say  I  have  heard  it  spoken  of." 

In  one  sense,  the  pupil's  witty  answer  might  be  given  by 
a  large  majority  of  sublunary  beings.  How  many  people 
have  heard  speak  of  the  moon,  who  have  never  seen  it — at 
least  through  a  glass  or  a  telescope !  How  many  have  never 
examined  the  map  of  their  satellite ! 

In  looking  at  a  Selenographic  map,  one  peculiarity  strikes 
us.  Contrary  to  the  arrangement  followed  for  that  of  the 
Earth  and  Mars,  the  continents  occupy  more  particularly  the 
southern  hemisphere  of  the  lunar  globe.  These  continents 
do  not  show  such  decided,  clear,  and  regular  boundary  lines 


310  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

as  South  America,  Africa,  and  the  Indian  peninsula.  Their 
angular,  capricious,  and  deeply  indented  coasts,  are  rich  in 
gulfs  and  peninsulas.  They- remind  one  of  the  confusion  in 
the  islands  of  the  Sound,  where  the  land  is  excessively  In- 
dented^ If  navigation  ever  existed  on  the  surface  of  the 
moon,  it  must  have  been  wonderfully  difficult  and  danger- 
ous ;  and  we  may  well  pity  the  Selenite  sailors  and  hydrog- 
raphers;  the  former,  when  they  came  upon  these  perilous 
coasts,  the  latter,  when  they  took  the  soundings  of  its 
stormy  banks. 

We  may  also  notice  that,  on  the  lunar  sphere,  the  south 
pole  is  much  more  continental  than  the  north  pole.  On  the 
latter,  there  is  but  one  slight  strip  of  land  separated  from 
other  continents  by  vast  seas.  Towards  the  south,  conti- 
nents clothe  almost  the  whole  of  the  hemisphere.  It  is  even 
possible  that  the  Selenites  have  already  planted  the  flag  on 
one  of  their  poles,  whilst  Franklin,  Ross,  Kane,  Dumont 
d'Urville,  and  Lambert,  have  never  yet  been  able  to  attain 
that  unknown  point  of  the  terrestrial  globe. 

As  to  islands,  they  are  numerous  on  the  surface  of  the 
moon.  Nearly  all  oblong  or  circular,  and  as  if  traced  with 
the  compass,  they  seem  to  form  one  vast  Archipelago,  equal 
to  that  charming  group  lying  between  Greece  and  Asia 
Minor,  and  which  mythology  in  ancient  times  adorned  with 
most  graceful  legends.  Involuntarily  the  names  of  Naxos, 
Tenedos,  and  Carpathos,  rise  before  the  mind,  and  we  seek 
vainly  for  Ulysses'  vessel  or  the  "clipper"  of  the  Ar- 
gonauts. So  at  least  it  was  in  Michel  Ardan's  eyes.  To 
him  it  was  a  Grecian  Archipelago  that  he  saw  on  the  map. 
To  the  eyes  of  his  matter-of-fact  companions,  the  aspect  of 
these  coasts  recalled  rather  the  parceled-out  land  of  New 
Brunswick  and  Nova  Scotia;  and  where  the  Frenchman 
discovered  traces  of  the  heroes  of  fable,  these  Americans 
were  marking  the  most  favorable  points  for  the  establish- 
ment of  stores  in  the  interest  of  lunar  commerce  and  in- 
dustry. 

After  wandering  over  these  vast  continents,  the  eye  is  at- 
tracted by  still  greater  seas.  Not  only  their  formation,  but 
their  situation  and  aspect  remind  one  of  the  terrestrial 
oceans :  but  again,  as  on  earth,  these  seas  occupy  the  greater 
portion  of  the  globe.  But  in  point  of  fact,  these  are  not 
liquid  spaces,  but  plains,  the  nature  of  which  the  travelers 


FANCY  AND  REALITY  3" 

hoped  soon  to  determine.  Astronomers,  we  must  allow, 
have  graced  these  pretended  seas  with  at  least  odd  names, 
which  science  has  respected  up  to  the  present  time.  Michel 
Ardan  was  right  when  he  compared  this  map  to  a  "  Tendre 
card,"  got  up  by  a  Scudery  or  a  Cyrano  de  Bergerac. 
"  Only,"  said  he,  "  it  is  no  longer  the  sentimental  card  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  it  is  the  card  of  life,  very  neatly  divided 
into  two  parts,  one  feminine,  the  other  masculine ;  the  right 
hemisphere  for  woman,  the  left  for  man." 

In  speaking  thus,  Michel  made  his  prosaic  companions 
shrug  their  shoulders.  Barbicane  and  Nicholl  looked  upon 
the  lunar  map  from  a  very  different  point  of  view  to  that 
of  their  fantastic  friend.  Nevertheless,  their  fantastic 
friend  was  a  little  in  the  right.     Judge  for  yourselves. 

In  the  left  hemisphere  stretches  the  "  Sea  of  Clouds," 
where  human  reason  is  so  often  shipwrecked.  Not  far  off 
lies  the  "  Sea  of  Rains,"  fed  by  all  the  fever  of  existence. 
Near  this  is  the  "  Sea  of  Storms,"  where  man  is  ever  fight- 
ing against  his  passions,  which  too  often  gain  the  victory. 
Then,  worn  out  by  deceit,  treasons,  infidelity,  and  the  whole 
body  of  terrestrial  misery,  what  does  he  find  at  the  end  of 
his  career?  that  vast  "  Sea  of  Humors,"  barely  softened  by 
some  drops  of  the  waters  from  the  "Gulf  of  Dew!" 
Clouds,  rain,  storms,  and  humors, — does  the  life  of  man 
contain  aught  but  these?  and  is  it  net  summed  up  in  these 
four  words  ? 

The  right  hemisphere,  "  dedicated  to  the  ladies,"  encloses 
smaller  seas,  whose  significant  names  contain  every  incident 
of  a  feminine  existence.  There  is  the  "  Sea  of  Serenity," 
over  which  the  young  girl  bends;  "The  Lake  of  Dreams," 
reflecting  a  joyous  future;  the  "Sea  of  Nectar,"  with  its 
waves  of  tenderness  and  breezes  of  love;  "The  Sea  of 
Fruitfulness;"  "The  Sea  of  Crises:"  then  the  "Sea  of 
Vapors,"  whose  dimensions  are  perhaps  a  little  too  con- 
fined ;  and  lastly,  that  vast  "  Sea  of  Tranquillity,"  in  which 
every  false  passion,  every  useless  dream,  every  unsatisfied 
desire  is  at  length  absorbed,  and  whose  waves  emerge  peace- 
ably into  the  "  Lake  of  Death !  " 

What  a  strange  succession  of  names!  What  a  singular 
division  of  the  moon's  two  hemispheres,  joined  to  one  an- 
other like  man  and  woman,  and  forming  that  sphere  of  life 
carried  into  space !    And  was  not  the  fantastic  Michel  right 


312  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

in  thus  interpreting  the  fancies  of  the  ancient  astronomers? 
But  whilst  his  imagination  thus  roved  over  "  the  seas,"  his 
grave  companions  were  considering  things  more  geographi- 
cally. They  were  learning  this  new  world  by  heart.  They 
were  measuring  angles  and  diameters. 


CHAPTER  XII 

OROGRAPHIC  DETAILS 

The  course  taken  by  the  projectile,  as  we  have  before 
remarked,  was  bearing  it  towards  the  moon's  northern  hem- 
isphere. The  travelers  were  far  from  the  central  point 
which  they  would  have  struck,  had  their  course  not  been 
subject  to  an  irremediable  deviation.  It  was  past  midnight ; 
and  Barbicane  then  estimated  the  distance  at  750  miles, 
which  was  a  little  greater  than  the  length  of  the  lunar 
radius,  and  which  would  diminish  as  it  advanced  nearer  to 
the  North  Pole.  The  projectile  was  then  not  at  the  altitude 
of  the  equator;  but  across  the  tenth  parallel,  and  from  that 
latitude,  carefully  taken  on  the  map  to  the  pole,  Barbicane 
and  his  two  companions  were  able  to  observe  the  moon 
under  the  most  favorable  conditions.  Indeed,  by  means  of 
glasses,  the  above  named  distance  was  reduced  to  little  more 
than  fourteen  miles.  The  telescope  of  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains brought  the  moon  much  nearer;  but  the  terrestrial  at- 
mosphere singularly  lessened  its  power.  Thus  Barbicane, 
posted  in  his  projectile,  with  the  glasses  to  his  eyes,  could 
seize  upon  details  which  were  almost  imperceptible  to 
earthly  observers. 

"  My  friends,"  said  the  president,  in  a  serious  voice,  "  I 
do  not  know  whither  we  are  going:  I  do  not  know  if  we 
shall  ever  see  the  terrestrial  globe  again.  Nevertheless,  let 
us  proceed  as  if  our  work  would  one  day  be  useful  to  our 
fellow-men.  Let  us  keep  our  minds  free  from  every  other 
consideration.  We  are  astonomers;  and  this  projectile  is 
a  room  in  the  Cambridge  University,  carried  into  space. 
Let  us  make  our  observations !  " 

This  said,  work  was  begun  with  great  exactness ;  and  they 
faithfully  reproduced  the  different  aspects  of  the  moon,  at 
the  different  distances  which  the  projectile  reached. 

At  the  time  that  the  projectile  was  as  high  as  the  tenth 


OROGRAPHIC   DETAILS  313 

parallel,  N.  latitude,  it  seemed  rigidly  to  follow  trie  twen- 
tieth degree  E.  longitude.  We  must  here  make  one  im- 
portant remark  with  regard  to  the  map  by  which  they  were 
taking  observations.  In  the  Selenographical  maps  where, 
on  account  of  the  reversing  of  the  objects  by  the  glasses,  the 
south  is  above  and  the  north  below,  it  would  seem  natural 
that,  on  account  of  that  inversion,  the  east  should  be  to  the 
left  hand,  and  the  west  to  the  right.  But  it  is  not  so.  If 
the  map  were  turned  upside  down,  showing  the  moon  as  we 
see  her,  the  east  would  be  to  the  left,  and  the  west  to  the 
right,  contrary  to  that  which  exists  on  terrestrial  maps. 
The  following  is  the  reason  of  this  anomaly.  Observers 
in  the  northern  hemisphere  (say  in  Europe)  see  the  moon 
in  the  south, — according  to  them.  When  they  take  obser- 
vations, they  turn  their  backs  to  the  north,  the  reverse  posi- 
tion to  that  which  they  occupy  when  they  study  a  terrestrial 
map.  As  they  turn  their  backs  to  the  north,  the  east  is  on 
their  left,  and  the  west  to  their  right.  To  observers  in  the 
southern  hemisphere  (Patagonia  for  example),  the  moon's 
west  would  be  quite  to  their  left,  and  the  east  to  their  right, 
as  the  south  is  behind  them.  Such  is  the  reason  of  the  ap- 
parent reversing  of  these  two  cardinal  points,  and  we  must 
bear  it  in  mind  in  order  to  be  able  to  follow  President  Bar- 
bicane's  observations. 

With  the  help  of  Boeer  and  Moedler's  Mappa  Seleno- 
graphica,  the  travelers  were  able  at  once  to  recognize  that 
portion  of  the  disc  enclosed  within  the  field  of  their  glasses. 

"What  are  we  looking  at,  at  this  moment?"  asked 
Michel. 

"  At  the  northern  part  of  the  '  Sea  of  Clouds,'  "  answered 
Barbicane.  "  We  are  too  far  off  to  recognize  its  nature. 
Are  these  plains  composed  of  arid  sand,  as  the  first  as- 
tronomer mantained?  Or  are  they  nothing  but  immense 
forests,  according  to  M.  Warren  de  la  Rue's  opinion,  who 
gives  the  moon  an  atmosphere,  though  a  very  low  and  a 
very  dense  one  ?  That  we  shall  know  by  and  by.  We  must 
affirm  nothing  until  we  are  in  a  position  to  do  so." 

This  "  Sea  of  Clouds  "  is  rather  doubtfully  marked  out 
upon  the  maps.  It  is  supposed  that  these  vast  plains  are 
strewn  with  blocks  of  lava  from  the  neighboring  volcanoes 
on  its  right,  Ptolemy,  Purbach,  Arzachel.  But  the  pro- 
jectile was  advancing,  and  sensibly  nearing  it.     Soon  there 


314  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

appeared  the  heights  which  bound  this  sea  at  this  northern 
limit.  Before  them  rose  a  mountain  radiant  with  beauty, 
the  top  of  which  seemed  lost  in  an  eruption  of  solar  rays. 

"That  is ?"  asked  Michel. 

"  Copernicus,"  replied  Barbicane. 

"  Let  us  see  Copernicus." 

This  mount  situated  in  90  north  latitude  and  200  east 
longitude,  rose  to  a  height  of  10,600  feet  above  the  surface 
of  the  moon.  It  is  quite  visible  from  the  earth ;  and  astrono- 
mers can  study  it  with  ease,  particularly  during  the  phase 
between  the  last  quarter  and  the  new  moon,  because  then 
the  shadows  are  thrown  lengthways  from  east  to  west,  al- 
lowing them  to  measure  the  heights. 

This  Copernicus  forms  the  most  important  of  the  radiat- 
ing system,  situated  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  according 
to  Tycho  Brahe.  It  rises  isolated  like  a  gigantic  lighthouse 
on  that  portion  of  the  "  Sea  of  Clouds,"  which  is  bounded  by 
the  "  Sea  of  Tempests,"  thus  lighting  by  its  splendid  rays 
two  oceans  at  a  time.  It  was  a  sight  without  an  equal, 
those  long  luminous  trains,  so  dazzling  in  the  full  moon, 
and  which,  passing  the  boundary  chain  on  the  north,  ex- 
tends to  the  "  Sea  of  Rains."  At  one  o'clock  of  the  ter- 
restrial morning  the  projectile,  like  a  balloon  borne  into 
space,  overlooked  the  top  of  this  superb  mountain.  Bar- 
bicane could  recognize  perfectly  its  chief  features.  Co- 
pernicus is  comprised  in  the  series  of  ringed  mountains  of 
the  first  order,  in  the  division  of  great  circles.  Like  Kepler 
and  Aristarchus,  which  overlook  the  Ocean  of  Tempests, 
sometimes  it  appeared  like  a  brilliant  point  through  the 
cloudy  light,  and  was  taken  for  a  volcano  in  activity.  But 
it  is  only  an  extinct  one, — like  all  on  that  side  of  the  moon. 
Its  circumference  showed  a  diameter  of  about  twenty-two 
leagues.  The  glasses  discovered  traces  of  stratification  pro- 
duced by  successive  eruptions,  and  the  neighborhood  was 
strewn  with  volcanic  remains  which  still  choked  some  of 
the  craters. 

"  There  exist,"  said  Barbicane,  "  several  kinds  of  circles 
on  the  surface  of  the  moon,  and  it  is  easy  to  see  that  Co- 
pernicus belongs  to  the  radiating  class.  If  we  were  nearer, 
we  should  see  the  cones  bristling  on  the  inside,  which  in 
former  times  were  so  many  fiery  mouths.  A  curious  ar- 
rangement, and  one  without  an  exception  on  the  lunar  disc, 


OROGRAPHIC  DETAILS  315 

is  that  the  interior  surface  of  these  circles  is  the  reverse 
of  the  exterior,  and  contrary  to  the  form  taken  by  terrestrial 
craters.  It  follows,  then,  that  the  general  curve  of  the  bot- 
tom of  these  circles  gives  a  sphere  of  a  smaller  diameter 
than  that  of  the  moon." 

"And  why  this  peculiar  disposition?"  asked  Nicholl. 

"  We  do  not  know,"  replied  Barbicane. 

"  What  splendid  radiation !  "  said  Michel.  "  One  could 
hardly  see  a  finer  spectacle,  I  think." 

"  What  would  you  say,  then,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  if 
chance  should  bear  us  towards  the  southern  hemisphere  ?  " 

"  Well,  I  should  say  that  it  was  still  more  beautiful,"  re- 
torted Michel  Ardan. 

At  this  moment  the  projectile  hung  perpendicularly  over 
the  circle.  The  circumference  of  Copernicus  formed  al- 
most a  perfect  circle,  and  its  steep  escarpments  were  clearly 
defined.  They  could  even  distinguish  a  second  ringed  en- 
closure. Around  spread  a  greyish  plain,  of  a  wild  aspect, 
on  which  every  relief  was  marked  in  yellow.  At  the  bot- 
tom of  the  circle,  as  if  enclosed  in  a  jewel  case,  sparkled  for 
one  instant  two  or  three  eruptive  cones,  like  enormous 
dazzling  gems.  Towards  the  north  the  escarpments  were 
lowered  by  a  depression  which  would  probably  have  given 
access  to  the  interior  of  the  crater. 

In  passing  over  the  surrounding  plains,  Barbicane  noticed 
a  great  number  of  less  important  mountains;  and  among 
others  a  little  ringed  one  called  Guy  Lussac,  the  breadth  of 
which  measured  twelve  miles. 

Towards  the  south,  the  plain  was  very  flat,  without  one 
elevation,  without  one  projection.  Towards  the  north,  on 
the  contrary,  till  where  it  was  bounded  by  the  Sea  of 
Storms,  it  resembled  a  liquid  surface  agitated  by  a  storm, 
of  which  the  hills  and  hollows  formed  a  succession  of  waves 
suddenly  congealed.  Over  the  whole  of  this,  and  in  all 
directions,  lay  the  luminous  lines,  all  converging  to  the  sum- 
mit of  Copernicus. 

The  travelers  discussed  the  origin  of  these  strange  rays; 
but  they  could  not  determine  their  nature  any  more  than 
terrestrial  observers. 

"  But  why,"  said  Nicholl,  "  should  not  these  rays  be 
simply  spurs  of  mountains  which  reflect  more  vividly  the 
light  of  the  sun?" 


316  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"  No,"  replied  Barbicane ;  "  if  it  was  so,  under  certain 
conditions  of  the  moon,  these  ridges  would  cast  shadows, 
and  they  do  not  cast  any." 

And  indeed,  these  rays  only  appeared  when  the  orb  of 
day  was  in  opposition  to  the  moon,  and  disappeared  as  soon 
as  its  rays  became  oblique. 

"  But  how  have  they  endeavored  to  explain  these  lines 
of  light?  "  asked  Michel;  "  for  I  cannot  believe  that  savants 
would  ever  be  stranded  for  want  of  an  explanation." 

"  Yes,"  replied  Barbicane;  "  Herschel  has  put  forward  an 
opinion,  but  he  did  not  venture  to  affirm  it." 

"  Never  mind.     What  was  the  opinion?  " 

"  He  thought  that  these  rays  might  be  streams  of  cooled 
lava  which  shone  when  the  sun  beat  straight  upon  them.  It 
may  be  so;  but  nothing  can  be  less  certain.  Besides,  if  we 
pass  nearer  to  Tycho,  we  shall  be  in  a  better  position  to  find 
out  the  cause  of  this  radiation." 

"  Do  you  know,  my  friends,  what  that  plain,  seen  from 
the  height  we  are  at,  resembles?  "  said  Michel. 

"  No,"  replied  Nicholl. 

"  Very  well :  with  all  those  pieces  of  lava  lengthened  like 
rockets,  it  resembles  an  immense  game  of  spelikans." 

"  Do  be  serious,"  said  Barbicane. 

"Well,  let  us  be  serious,"  replied  Michel,  quietly;  "and 
instead  of  spelikans,  let  us  put  bones.  This  plain  would 
then  be  nothing  but  an  immense  cemetery,  on  which  would 
repose  the  mortal  remains  of  thousands  of  extinct  genera- 
tions.    Do  you  prefer  that  high-flown  comparison?  " 

"  One  is  as  good  as  the  other,"  retorted  Barbicane. 

"  My  word,  you  are  difficult  to  please,"  answered  Michel. 

"  My  worthy  friend,"  continued  the  matter-of-fact  Bar- 
bicane, "  it  matters  but  little  what  it  resembles,  when  we  do 
not  know  what  it  is" 

"  Well  answered,"  exclaimed  Michel.  "  That  will  teach 
me  to  reason  with  savants." 

About  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  Barbicane  found  that 
they  were  above  the  twentieth  lunar  parallel.  The  distance 
of  the  projectile  from  the  moon  was  not  more  than  600 
miles.  Barbicane,  now  perceiving  that  the  projectile  was 
steadily  approaching  the  lunar  disc,  did  not  despair  of  reach- 
ing her,  or  at  least  of  discovering  the  secrets  of  her  con- 
figuration. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

LUNAR  LANDSCAPES 

At  half-past  two  in  the  morning,  the  projectile  was  over 
the  thirteenth  lunar  parallel  and  at  the  effective  distance  of 
goo  miles,  reduced  by  the  glasses  to  five.  It  still  seemed 
impossible,  however,  that  it  could  ever  touch  any  part  of  the 
disc.  Its  motive  speed,  comparatively  so  moderate,  was 
inexplicable  to  President  Barbicane.  At  that  distance  from 
the  moon  it  must  have  been  considerable,  to  enable  it  to  bear 
up  against  her  attraction.  Here  was  a  phenomenon  the 
cause  of  which  escaped  them  again.  Besides,  time  failed 
them  to  investigate  the  cause.  All  lunar  relief  was  defiling 
under  the  eyes  of  the  travelers,  and  they  would  not  lose  a 
single  detail. 

Under  the  glasses  the  disc  appeared  at  the  distance  of 
five  miles.  What  would  an  aeronaut,  borne  to  this  distance 
from  the  earth,  distinguish  on  its  surface?  We  cannot 
say,  since  the  greatest  ascension  has  not  been  more  than 
25,000  feet. 

This,  however,  is  an  exact  description  of  what  Barbicane 
and  his  companions  saw  at  this  height.  Large  patches  of 
different  colors  appeared  on  the  disc.  Stenographers  are 
not  agreed  upon  the  nature  of  these  colors.  There  are  sev- 
eral, and  rather  vividly  marked.  Julius  Schmidt  pretends 
that,  if  the  terrestrial  oceans  were  dried  up,  a  Selenite  ob- 
server could  not  distinguish  on  the  globe  a  greater  diversity 
of  shades  between  the  oceans  and  the  continental  plains  than 
those  on  the  moon  present  to  a  terrestrial  observer.  Ac- 
cording to  him,  the  color  common  to  the  vast  plains  known 
by  the  name  of  "  seas  "  is  a  dark  gray  mixed  with  green 
and  brown.  Some  of  the  large  craters  present  the  same 
appearance.  Barbicane  knew  this  opinion  of  the  German 
Selenographer,  an  opinion  shared  by  Bceer  and  Moedler. 
Observation  has  proved  that  right  was  on  their  side,  and 
not  on  that  of  some  astronomers  who  admit  the  existence 
of  only  gray  on  the  moon's  surface.  In  some  parts  green 
was  very  distinct,  such  as  springs,  according  to  Julius 
Schmidt,  from  the  seas  of  Serenity  and  Humors.  Bar- 
bicane also  noticed  large  craters,  without  any  interior  cones, 
which  shed  a  bluish  tint  similar  to  the  reflection  of  a  sheet 
of  steel  freshly  polished.  These  colors  belonged  really  to 
the  lunar  disc,  and  did  not  result,  as  some  astronomers  say, 

317 


3i8  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

either  from  the  imperfection  in  the  objective  of  the  glasses 
or  from  the  interposition  of  the  terrestrial  atmosphere. 

Not  a  doubt  existed  in  Barbicane's  mind  with  regard  to 
it,  as  he  observed  it  through  space,  and  so  could  not  commit 
any  optical  error.  He  considered  the  establishment  of  this 
fact  as  an  acquisition  to  science.  Now,  were  these  shades 
of  green,  belonging  to  tropical  vegetation,  kept  up  by  a  low 
dense  atmosphere?     He  could  not  yet  say. 

Farther  on,  he  noticed  a  reddish  tint,  quite  defined.  The 
same  shade  had  before  been  observed  at  the  bottom  of  an 
isolated  enclosure,  known  by  the  name  of  Lichtenburg's 
circle,  which  is  situated  near  the  Hercynian  mountains,  on 
the  borders  of  the  moon;  but  they  could  not  tell  the  nature 
of  it. 

They  were  not  more  fortunate  with  regard  to  another 
peculiarity  of  the  disc,  for  they  could  not  decide  upon  the 
cause  of  it. 

Michel  Ardan  was  watching  near  the  president,  when  he 
noticed  long  white  lines,  vividly  lighted  up  by  the  direct  rays 
of  the  sun.  It  was  a  succession  of  luminous  furrows,  very 
different  from  the  radiation  of  Copernicus  not  long  before; 
they  ran  parallel  with  each  other. 

Michel,  with  his  usual  readiness,  hastened  to  ex- 
claim : 

"  Look  there !  cultivated  fields !  " 

"  Cultivated  fields ! "  replied  Nicholl,  shrugging  his 
shoulders. 

"  Plowed,  at  all  events,"  retorted  Michel  Ardan ;  "  but 
what  laborers  those  Selenites  must  be,  and  what  giant  oxen 
they  must  harness  to  their  plow  to  cut  such  furrows ! " 

"They  are  not  furrows,"  said  Barbicane;  "they  are 
rifts." 

"  Rifts?  stuff!  "  replied  Michel  mildly;  "  but  what  do  you 
mean  by  '  rifts  '  in  the  scientific  world?  " 

Barbicane  immediately  enlightened  his  companion  as  to 
what  he  knew  about  lunar  rifts.  He  knew  that  they  were 
a  kind  of  furrow  found  on  every  part  of  the  disc  which 
was  not  mountainous ;  that  these  furrows,  generally  isolated, 
measured  from  400  to  500  leagues  in  length;  that  their 
breadth  varied  from  1,000  to  1,500  yards,  and  that  their 
borders  were  strictly  parallel;  but  he  knew  nothing  more 
either  of  their  formation  or  their  nature. 


LUNAR  LANDSCAPES  319 

Barbicane,  through  his  glasses,  observed  these  rifts  with 
great  attention.  He  noticed  that  their  borders  were  formed 
of  steep  declivities;  they  were  long  parallel  ramparts,  and 
with  some  small  amount  of  imagination  he  might  have 
admitted  the  existence  of  long  lines  of  fortifications,  raised 
by  Selenite  engineers.  Of  these  different  rifts  some  were 
perfectly  straight,  as  if  cut  by  a  line;  others  were  slightly 
curved,  though  still  keeping  their  borders  parallel;  some 
crossed  each  other,  some  cut  through  craters;  where  they 
wound  through  ordinary  cavities,  such  as  Posidonius  or 
Petavius;  there  they  wound  through  the  seas,  such  as  the 
Sea  of  Serenity. 

These  rifts  naturally  excited  the  imagination  of  terres- 
trial astronomers.  The  first  observations  had  not  dis- 
covered the  rifts.  Neither  Hevelius,  Cassim,  La  Hire,  nor 
Herschel  seemed  to  have  known  them.  It  was  Schroeter 
who  in  1789  first  drew  attention  to  them.  Others  followed 
who  studied  them,  as  Pastorff,  Gruithuysen,  Bceer,  and 
Moedler.  At  this  time  their  number  amounts  to  seventy; 
but,  if  they  have  been  counted,  their  nature  has  not  yet  been 
determined;  they  are  certainly  not  fortifications,  any  more 
than  they  are  the  ancient  beds  of  dried-up  rivers;  for,  on 
one  side,  the  waters,  so  slight  on  the  moon's  surface,  could 
never  have  worn  such  drains  for  themselves;  and,  on  the 
other,  they  often  cross  craters  of  great  elevation. 

We  must,  however,  allow  that  Michel  Ardan  had  "  an 
idea,"  and  that,  without  knowing  it,  he  coincided  in  that 
respect  with  Julius  Schmidt. 

"Why,"  said  he,  "should  not  these  unaccountable  ap- 
pearances be  simply  phenomena  of  vegetation?  " 

"What  do  you  mean?  "  asked  Barbicane,  quickly. 

"  Do  not  excite  yourself,  my  worthy  president,"  replied 
Michel  Ardan ;  "  might  it  not  be  possible  that  the  dark  lines 
forming  that  bastion  were  rows  of  trees  regularly 
placed?  " 

"You  still  stick  to  your  vegetation,  then?"  said  Bar- 
bicane. 

"  I  like,"  retorted  Michel  Ardan,  "  to  explain  what  you 
savants  cannot  explain  ?  at  least  my  hypothesis  has  the  ad- 
vantage of  indicating  why  these  rifts  disappear,  or  seem  to 
disappear,  at  certain  seasons." 

"And  for  what  reason?" 


320  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"  For  the  reason  that  the  trees  become  invisible  when  they 
lose  their  leaves,  and  visible  when  they  regain  them." 

"  Your  explanation  is  ingenious,  my  dear  companion," 
replied  Barbicane,  "  but  inadmissible." 

"Why?" 

"  Because,  so  to  speak,  there  are  no  seasons  on  the  moon's 
surface,  and  that,  consequently,  the  phenomena  of  vegeta- 
tion of  which  you  speak  can  not  occur." 

Indeed,  the  slight  obliquity  of  the  lunar  axis  keeps  the  sun 
at  an  almost  equal  height  in  every  latitude.  Above  the 
equatorial  regions  the  radiant  orb  almost  invariably  oc- 
cupies the  zenith,  and  does  not  pass  the  limits  of  the  horizon 
in  the  polar  regions;  thus,  according  to  each  region,  there 
reigns  a  perpetual  Winter,  Spring,  Summer,  or  Autumn, 
as  in  the  planet  Jupiter,  whose  axis  is  but  little  inclined  upon 
its  orbit. 

But  the  projectile  had  now  attained  the  400  of  lunar  lat, 
at  a  distance  not  exceeding  400  miles.  Through  the  glasses 
objects  appeared  to  be  only  four  miles  distant. 

At  this  point,  under  their  feet,  rose  Mount  Helicon,  1,520 
feet  high,  and  round  about  the  left  rose  moderate  elevations, 
enclosing  a  small  portion  of  the  "  Sea  of  Rains,"  under  the 
name  of  the  Gulf  of  Iris.  The  terrestrial  atmosphere 
would  have  to  be  one  hundred  and  seventy  times  more 
transparent  than  it  is,  to  allow  astronomers  to  make  per- 
fect observations  on  the  moon's  surface;  but  in  the  void  in 
which  the  projectile  floated  no  flu;d  interposed  itself  be- 
tween the  eye  of  the  observer  and  the  object  observed. 
And  more,  Barbicane  found  himself  carried  to  a  greater 
distance  than  the  most  powerful  telescopes  had  ever  done 
before,  either  that  of  Lord  Rosse  or  that  of  the  Rocky 
Mountains.  He  was,  therefore,  under  extremely  favorable 
conditions  for  solving  that  great  question  of  the  habitability 
of  the  moon;  but  the  solution  still  escaped  him;  he  could 
distinguish  nothing  but  desert  beds,  immense  plains,  and 
towards  the  north,  arid  mountains.  Not  a  work  betrayed 
the  hand  of  man ;  not  a  ruin  marked  his  course ;  not  a  group 
of  animals  was  to  be  seen  indicating  life,  even  in  an  inferior 
degree.  In  no  part  was  there  life,  in  no  part  was  there  an 
appearance  of  vegetation.  Of  the  three  kingdoms  which 
share  the  terrestrial  globe  between  them,  one  alone  was 
represented  on  the  lunar,  and  that  the  mineral. 

V.  Ill  Verne 


LUNAR  LANDSCAPES  321 

"Ah,  indeed!"  said  Michel  Ardan,  a  little  out  of  coun- 
tenance ;  "  then  you  see  no  one  ?  " 

"  No,"  answered  Nicholl ;  "  up  to  this  time  not  a  man, 
not  an  animal,  not  a  tree!  After  all,  whether  the  atmos- 
phere has  taken  refuge  at  the  bottom  of  cavities,  in  the 
midst  of  the  circles,  or  even  on  the  opposite  face  of  the 
moon,  we  can  not  decide." 

"  Besides,"  added  Barbicane,  "  even  to  the  most  piercing 
eye  a  man  can  not  be  distinguished  farther  than  three  miles 
and  a  half  off;  so  that,  if  there  are  any  Selenites,  they  can 
see  our  projectile,  but  we  can  not  see  them." 

Towards  four  in  the  morning,  at  the  height  of  the  fiftieth 
parallel,  the  distance  was  reduced  to  300  miles.  To  the  left 
ran  a  line  of  mountains  capriciously  shaped,  lying  in  the 
full  light.  To  the  right,  on  the  contrary,  lay  a  black  hol- 
low, resembling  a  vast  well,  unfathomable  and  gloomy, 
drilled  into  the  lunar  soil. 

This  hole  was  the  "Black  Lake;"  it  was  Pluto,  a  deep 
circle  which  can  be  conveniently  studied  from  the  earth, 
between  the  last  quarter  and  the  new  moon,  when  the  shad- 
ows fall  from  west  to  east. 

This  black  color  is  rarely  met  with  on  the  surface  of  the 
satellite.  As  yet  it  has  only  been  recognized  in  the  depths 
of  the  circle  of  Endymion,  to  the  east  of  the  Cold  Sea,  in 
the  northern  hemisphere,  and  at  the  bottom  of  Grimaldi's 
circle,  on  the  equator,  towards  the  eastern  border  of  the  orb. 

Pluto  is  an  annular  mountain,  situated  in  51  °  north  lati- 
tude and  9  east  longitude.  Its  circuit  is  forty-seven  miles 
long  and  thirty-two  broad. 

Barbicane  regretted  that  they  were  not  passing  directly 
above  this  opening.  There  was  an  abyss  to  fathom,  per- 
haps some  mysterious  phenomenon  to  surprise;  but  the  pro- 
jectile's course  could  not  be  altered.  They  must  rigidly 
submit.  They  could  not  guide  a  balloon,  still  less  a  pro- 
jectile, when  once  enclosed  within  its  walls.  Towards  five 
in  the  morning  the  northern  limits  of  the  Sea  of  Rains  was 
at  length  passed.  The  mounts  of  Condamine  and  Fon- 
tenelle  remained — one  on  the  right,  the  other  on  the  left. 
That  part  of  the  disc  beginning  with  6o°  was  becoming 
quite  mountainous.  The  glasses  brought  them  to  within 
two  miles,  less  than  that  separating  the  summit  of  Mont 
Blanc  from  the  level  of  the  sea.     The  whole  region  was 


322  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

bristling  with  spikes  and  circles.  Towards  the  6o°  Philo- 
laus  stood  predominant  at  a  height  of  5,550  feet  with  its 
elliptical  crater,  and  seen  from  this  distance,  the  disc  showed 
a  very  fantastical  appearance.  Landscapes  were  presented 
to  the  eye  under  very  different  conditions  from  those  on 
the  earth,  and  also  very  inferior  to  them. 

The  moon  having  no  atmosphere,  the  consequences  aris- 
ing from  the  absence  of  this  gaseous  envelope  have  already 
been  shown.  No  twilight  on  her  surface;  night  following 
day  and  day  following  night  with  the  suddenness  of  a  lamp 
which  is  extinguished  or  lighted  amidst  profound  darkness. 
Hence  the  harshness  of  contrasts,  which  only  admit  of  two 
colors,  black  and  white.  If  a  Selenite  were  to  shade  his 
eyes  from  the  sun's  rays,  the  sky  would  seem  absolutely 
black,  and  the  stars  would  shine  to  him  as  on  the  darkest 
night.  Judge  of  the  impression  produced  on  Barbicane 
and  his  three  friends  by  this  strange  scene!  Their  eyes 
were  confused.  They  could  no  longer  grasp  the  respective 
distances  of  the  different  plains.  A  lunar  landscape  with- 
out the  softening  of  the  phenomena  of  chiaro-oscuro  could 
not  be  rendered  by  an  earthly  landscape  painter:  it  would 
be  spots  of  ink  on  a  white  page — nothing  more. 

This  aspect  was  not  altered  even  when  the  projectile,  at 
the  height  of  8o°,  was  only  separated  from  the  moon  by  a 
distance  of  fifty  miles;  nor  even  when,  at  five  in  the  morn- 
ing, it  passed  at  less  than  twenty-five  miles  from  the  moun- 
tain of  Gioja,  a  distance  reduced  by  the  glasses  to  a  quarter 
of  a  mile.  It  seemed  as  if  the  moon  might  be  touched  by 
the  hand !  It  seemed  impossible  that,  before  long,  the  pro- 
jectile would  not  strike  her,  if  only  at  the  north  pole,  the 
brilliant  arch  of  which  was  so  distinctly  visible  on  the  black 
sky. 

Michel  Ardan  wanted  to  open  one  of  the  scuttles  and 
throw  himself  onto  the  moon's  surface.  A  very  useless 
attempt;  for  if  the  projectile  could  not  attain  any  point 
whatever  of  the  satellite,  Michel,  carried  along  by  its  mo- 
tion, could  not  attain  it  either. 

At  that  moment,  at  six  o'clock,  the  lunar  pole  appeared. 
The  disc  only  presented  to  the  traveler's  gaze  one  half 
brilliantly  lit  up,  whilst  the  other  disappeared  in  the  dark- 
ness. Suddenly  the  projectile  passed  the  line  of  demarca- 
tion between  intense  light  and  absolute  darkness,  and  was 
plunged  in  profound  night. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

THE    NIGHT   OF  THREE    HUNDRED   AND    FIFTY-FOUR    HOURS 
AND  A  HALF 

At  the  moment  when  this  phenomenon  took  place  so 
rapidly,  the  projectile  was  skirting  the  moon's  north  pole  at 
less  than  twenty-five  miles  distance.  Some  seconds  had 
sufficed  to  plunge  it  into  the  absolute  darkness  of  space. 
The  transition  was  so  sudden,  without  shade,  without  grada- 
tion of  light,  without  attenuation  of  the  luminous  waves, 
that  the  orb  seemed  to  have  been  extinguished  by  a  power- 
ful blow. 

"  Melted,  disappeared !  "  Michel  Ardan  exclaimed,  aghast. 

Indeed,  there  was  neither  reflection  nor  shadow.  Noth- 
ing more  was  to  be  seen  of  that  disc,  formerly  so  dazzling. 
The  darkness  was  complete,  and  rendered  even  more  so  by 
the  rays  from  the  stars.  It  was  "  that  blackness  "  in  which 
the  lunar  nights  are  insteeped,  which  last  three  hundred  and 
fifty-four  hours  and  a  half  at  each  point  of  the  disc,  a  long 
night  resulting  from  the  equality  of  the  translatory  and 
rotatory  _  movements  of  the  moon.  The  projectile,  im- 
merged  in  the  conical  shadow  of  the  satellite,  experienced 
the  action  of  the  solar  rays  no  more  than  any  of  its  invisible 
points. 

In  the  interior,  the  obscurity  was  complete.  They  could 
not  see  each  other.  Hence  the  necessity  of  dispelling  the 
darkness.  However  desirous  Barbicane  might  be  to  hus- 
band the  gas,  the  reserve  of  which  was  small,  he  was  obliged 
to  ask  from  it  a  fictitious  light,  an  expensive  brilliancy 
which  the  sun  then  refused. 

"  Devil  take  the  radiant  orb !  "  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan, 
"  which  forces  us  to  expend  gas,  instead  of  giving  us  his 
rays  gratuitously." 

_ "  Do  not  let  us  accuse  the  sun,"  said  Nicholl,  "  it  is  not 
his  fault,  but  that  of  the  moon,  which  has  come  and  placed 
herself  like  a  screen  between  us  and  it." 

"  It  is  the  sun !  "  continued  Michel. 

'*  It  is  the  moon !  "  retorted  Nicholl. 

An  idle  dispute,  which  Barbicane  put  an  end  to  by  say- 
ing: 

"  My  friends,  it  is  neither  the  fault  of  the  sun  nor  of 
the  moon;  it  is  the  fault  of  the  projectile,  which,  instead  of 
rigidly  following  its  course,  has  awkwardly  missed  it.     To 

323 


324  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

be  more  just,  it  is  the  fault  of  that  unfortunate  meteor 
which  has  so  deplorably  altered  our  first  direction." 

"  Well,"  replied  Michel  Ardan,  "  as  the  matter  is  settled, 
let  us  have  breakfast.  After  a  whole  night  of  watching, 
it  is  fair  to  build  ourselves  up  a  little." 

This  proposal  meeting  with  no  contradiction,  Michel  pre- 
pared the  repast  in  a  few  minutes.  But  they  ate  for  eat- 
ing's sake,  they  drank  without  toasts,  without  hurrahs. 
The  bold  travelers  being  borne  away  into  gloomy  space, 
without  their  accustomed  cortege  of  rays,  felt  a  vague  un- 
easiness at  their  hearts.  The  "  strange  "  shadow  so  dear  to 
Victor  Hugo's  pen  bound  them  on  all  sides.  But  they 
talked  over  the  interminable  night  of  three  hundred  and 
fifty-four  hours  and  a  half,  nearly  fifteen  days,  which  the 
law  of  physics  has  imposed  on  the  inhabitants  of  the  moon. 

Barbicane  gave  his  friends  some  explanation  of  the 
causes  and  the  consequences  of  this  curious  phenomenon. 

"Curious  indeed,"  said  they;  "for,  if  each  hemisphere 
of  the  moon  is  deprived  of  solar  light  for  fifteen  days,  that 
above  which  we  now  float  does  not  even  enjoy  during  its 
long  night  any  view  of  the  earth  so  beautifully  lit  up.  In 
a  word  she  has  no  moon  (applying  this  designation  to  our 
globe)  but  on  one  side  of  her  disc.  Now  if  this  were  the 
case  with  the  earth, — if,  for  example,  Europe  never  saw 
the  moon,  and  she  was  only  visible  at  the  antipodes,  imag- 
ine to  yourself  the  astonishment  of  a  European  on  arriv- 
ing in  Australia." 

"They  would  make  the  voyage  for  nothing  but  to  see 
the  moon !  "  replied  Michel. 

"  Very  well !  "  continued  Barbicane,  "  that  astonishment 
is  reserved  for  the  Selenites  who  inhabit  the  face  of  the 
moon  opposite  to  the  earth,  a  face  which  is  ever  invisible  to 
our  countrymen  of  the  terrestrial  globe." 

"  And  which  we  should  have  seen,"  added  Nicholl,  "  if 
wc  had  arrived  here  when  the  moon  was  new,  that  is  to  say 
fifteen  days  later." 

"I  will  add,  to  make  amends,"  continued  Barbicane, 
"that  the  inhabitants  of  the  visible  face  are  singularly 
favored  by  nature,  to  the  detriment  of  their  brethren  on  the 
invisible  face.  The  latter,  as  you  see,  have  dark  nights  of 
354  hours,  without  one  single  ray  to  break  the  darkness. 
The  other,  on  the  contrary,  when  the  sun,  which  has  given 


A  LONG  tflGHT  325 

its  light  for  fifteen  days  sinks  below  the  horizon,  see  a 
splendid  orb  rise  on  the  opposite  horizon.  It  is  the  earth, 
which  is  thirteen  times  greater  than  that  diminutive  moon 
that  we  know ! — the  earth  which  developes  itself  at  a  diame- 
ter of  two  degrees,  and  which  sheds  a  light  thirteen  times 
greater  than  that  qualified  by  atmospheric  strata — the  earth 
which  only  disappears  at  the  moment  when  the  sun  reap- 
pears in  its  turn !  " 

"  Nicely  worded !  "  said  Michel,  "  slightly  academical 
perhaps." 

"  It  follows,  then,"  continued  Barbicane,  without  knit- 
ting his  brows,  "that  the  visible  face  of  the  disc  must  be 
very  agreeable  to  inhabit,  since  it  always  looks  on  either  the 
sun  when  the  moon  is  full,  or  on  the  earth  when  the  moon 
is  new." 

"  But,"  said  Nicholl,  "  that  advantage  must  be  well  com- 
pensated by  the  insupportable  heat  which  the  light  brings 
with  it." 

"  The  inconvenience,  in  that  respect,  is  the  same  for  the 
two  faces,  for  the  earth's  light  is  evidently  deprived  of 
heat.  But  the  invisible  face  is  still  more  searched  by  the 
heat  than  the  visible  face.  I  say  that  for  you,  Nicholl,  be- 
cause Michel  will  probably  not  understand." 

"  Thank  you,"  said  Michel. 

"  Indeed,"  continued  Barbicane,  "  when  the  invisible  face 
receives  at  the  same  time  light  and  heat  from  the  sun,  it  is 
because  the  moon  is  new ;  that  is  to  say,  she  is  situated  be- 
tween the  sun  and  the  earth.  It  follows,  then,  considering 
the  position  which  she  occupies  in  opposition  when  full, 
that  she  is  nearer  to  the  sun  by  twice  her  distance  from  the 
earth ;  and  that  distance  may  be  estimated  at  the  two-hun- 
dredth part  of  that  which  separates  the  sun  from  the  earth, 
or  in  round  numbers  400,000  miles.  So  that  invisible  face 
is  so  much  nearer  to  the  sun  when  she  receives  its  rays." 

"  Quite  right,"  replied  Nicholl. 

"  On  the  contrary,"  continued  Barbicane. 

"  One  moment,"  said  Michel,  interrupting  his  grave  com- 
panion. 

"What  do  you  want?" 

"  I  ask  to  be  allowed  to  continue  the  explanation." 

"And  why?" 

"  To  prove  that  I  understand." 


326  '  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"  Get  along  with  you,"  said  Barbicane,  smiling. 
"  On  the  contrary,"  said  Michel,  imitating  the  tone  and 
gestures  of  the  president,  "  on  the  contrary,  when  the  visible 
face  of  the  moon  is  lit  by  the  sun,  it  is  because  the  moon 
is  full,  that  is  to  say,  opposite  the  sun  with  regard  to  the 
earth.  The  distance  separating  it  from  the  radiant  orb  is 
then  increased  in  round  numbers  to  400,000  miles,  and  the 
heat  which  she  receives  must  be  a  little  less." 

"Very  well   said!"   exclaimed   Barbicane.      "Do  you 
know,  Michel,  that,  for  an  amateur,  you  are  intelligent." 
"  Yes,"  replied  Michel  coolly,  "  we  are  all  so  on  the  Boule- 
vard des  Italiens." 

Barbicane  gravely  clasped  the  hand  of  his  amiable  com- 
panion, and  continued  to  enumerate  the  advantages  reserved 
for  the  inhabitants  of  the  visible  face. 

Amongst  others,  he  mentioned  eclipses  of  the  sun,  which 
only  take  place  on  this  side  of  the  lunar  disc,  since,  in  order 
that  they  may  take  place,  it  is  necessary  for  the  moon  to 
be  in  opposition.  These  eclipses,  caused  by  the  interposi- 
tion of  the  earth  between  the  moon  and  the  sun,  can  last 
two  hours;  during  which  time,  by  reason  of  the  rays  re- 
fracted by  its  atmosphere,  the  terrestrial  globe  can  appear 
as  nothing  but  a  black  point  upon  the  sun. 

"  So,"  said  Nicholl,  "  there  is  a  hemisphere,  that  invisible 
hemisphere  which  is  very  ill  supplied,  very  ill  treated,  by 
nature." 

"Never  mind,"  replied  Michel;  "if  we  ever  become 
Selenites,  we  will  inhabit  the  visible  face.     I  like  the  light." 
Unless,  by  any  chance,"  answered  Nicholl,  "  the  atmos- 
phere should  be  condensed  on  the  other  side,  as  certain  as- 
tronomers pretend." 

"That  would  be  a  consideration,"  said  Michel. 
Breakfast   over,   the  observers   returned  to  their  post. 
They  tried  to  see  through  the  darkened  scuttles  by  ex- 
tinguishing all  light  in  the  projectile;  but  not  a  luminous 
spark  made  its  way  through  the  darkness. 

One  inexplicable  fact  preoccupied  Barbicane.  Why, 
having  passed  within  such  a  short  distance  of  the  moon- 
about  twenty-five  miles  only — why  the  projectile  had  not 
fallen?  If  its  speed  had  been  enormous,  he  could  have  un- 
derstood that  the  fall  would  not  have  taken  place;  but,  with 
a  relatively  moderate  speed,  that  resistance  to  the  moon's 


A  LONG  NIGHT  327 

attraction  could  not  be  explained.  Was  the  projectile  un- 
der some  foreign  influence?  Did  some  kind  of  body  re- 
tain it  in  the  ether  ?  It  was  quite  evident  that  it  could  never 
reach  any  point  of  the  moon.  Whither  was  it  going? 
Was  it  going  farther  from,  or  nearing,  the  disc?  Was  it 
being  borne  in  that  profound  darkness  through  the  infinity 
of  space?  How  could  they  learn,  how  calculate,  in  the 
midst  of  this  night?  All  these  questions  made  Barbicane 
uneasy,  but  he  could  not  solve  them. 

Certainly,  the  invisible  orb  was  there,  perhaps  only  some 
few  miles  off;  but  neither  he  nor  his  companions  could  see 
it.  If  there  was  any  noise  on  its  surface,  they  could  not 
hear  it.  Air,  that  medium  of  sound,  was  wanting  to  trans- 
mit the  groanings  of  that  moon  which  the  Arabic  legends 
call  "  a  man  already  half  granite,  and  still  breathing." 

One  must  allow  that  that  was  enough  to  aggravate  the 
most  patient  observers.  It  was  just  that  unknown  hemis- 
phere which  was  stealing  from  their  sight.  That  face 
which  fifteen  days  sooner,  or  fifteen  days  later,  had  been, 
or  would  be,  splendidly  illuminated  by  the  solar  rays,  was 
then  being  lost  in  utter  darkness.  In  fifteen  days  where 
would  the  projectile  be?  Who  could  say?  Where  would 
the  chances  of  conflicting  attractions  have  drawn  it  to? 
The  disappointment  of  the  travelers  in  the  midst  of  this 
utter  darkness  may  be  imagined.  All  observation  of  the 
lunar  disc  was  impossible.  The  constellations  alone  claimed 
all  their  attention ;  and  we  must  allow  that  the  astronomers 
Faye,  Charconac,  and  Secchi,  never  found  themselves  in 
circumstances  so  favorable  for  their  observation. 

Indeed,  nothing  could  equal  the  splendor  of  this  starry 
world,  bathed  in  limpid  ether.  Its  diamonds  set  in  the 
heavenly  vault  sparkled  magnificently.  The  eye  took  in 
the  firmament  from  the  Southern  Cross  to  the  North  Star, 
those  two  constellations  which  in  12,000  years,  by  reason  of 
the  succession  of  equinoxes,  will  resign  their  part  of  polar 
stars,  the  one  to  Canopus  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  the 
other  to  Wega  in  the  northern.  Imagination  loses  itself  in 
this  sublime  Infinity,  amidst  which  the  projectile  was  gravi- 
tating, like  a  new  star  created  by  the  hand  of  man.  From 
a  natural  cause,  these  constellations  shone  with  a  soft  luster; 
they  did  not  twinkle,  for  there  was  no  atmosphere  which, 
by  the  intervention  of  its  layers  unequally  dense  and  of 


328  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

different  degrees  of  humidity,  produces  this  scintillation. 
These  stars  were  soft  eyes,  looking  out  into  the  dark  night, 
amidst  the  silence  of  absolute  space. 

Long  did  the  travelers  stand  mute,  watching  the  con- 
stellated firmament,  upon  which  the  moon,  like  a  vast  screen, 
made  an  enormous  black  hole.  But  at  length  a  painful  sen- 
sation drew  them  from  their  watchings.  This  was  an  in- 
tense cold,  which  soon  covered  the  inside  of  the  glass  of  the 
scuttles  with  a  thick  coating  of  ice.  The  sun  was  no  longer 
warming  the  projectile  with  its  direct  rays,  and  thus  it  was 
losing  the  heat  stored  up  in  its  walls  by  degrees.  This  heat 
was  rapidly  evaporating  into  space  by  radiation,  and  a  con- 
siderably lower  temperature  was  the  result.  The  humidity 
of  the  interior  was  changed  into  ice  upon  contact  with  the 
glass,  preventing  all  observation. 

Nicholl  consulted  the  thermometer  and  saw  that  it  had 
fallen  to  seventeen  degrees  (centigrade)  below  zero.  So 
that,  in  spite  of  the  many  reasons  for  economizing,  Bar- 
bicane,  after  having  begged  light  from  the  gas,  was  also 
obliged  to  beg  for  heat.  The  projectile's  low  temperature 
was  no  longer  endurable.  Its  tenants  would  have  been 
frozen  to  death. 

"  Well !  "  observed  Michel,  "  we  can  not  reasonably  com- 
plain of  the  monotony  of  our  journey!  What  variety  we 
have  had,  at  least  in  temperature.  Now  we  are  blinded 
with  light  and  saturated  with  heat,  like  the  Indians  of  the 
Pampas!  now  plunged  into  profound  darkness,  amidst  the 
cold  like  the  Esquimaux  of  the  north  pole.  No,  indeed! 
we  have  no  right  to  complain ;  nature  does  wonders  in  our 
honor." 

"  But,"  asked  Nicholl,  "  what  is  the  temperature  out- 
side? " 

"  Exactly  that  of  the  planetary  space,"  replied  Bar- 
bicane. 

"  Then,"  continued  Michel  Ardan,  "  would  not  this  be 
the  time  to  make  the  experiment  which  we  dared  not  at- 
tempt, when  we  were  drowned  in  the  sun's  rays?  " 

"  It  is  now  or  never,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  for  we  are  in  a 
good  position  to  verify  the  temperature  of  space,  and  see 
if  Fourier  or  Pouillet's  calculations  are  exact." 

"  In  any  case  it  is  cold,"  said  Michel.  "  See !  the  steam 
of  the  interior  is  condensing  on  the  glasses  of  the  scuttles. 


A  LONG  NIGHT  329 

If  the  fall  continues,  the  vapor  of  our  breath  will  fall  in 
snow  around  us." 

"  Let  us  prepare  a  thermometer,"  said  Barbicane. 

We  may  imagine  that  an  ordinary  thermometer  would 
afford  no  result  under  the  circumstances  in  which  this  in- 
strument was  to  be  exposed.  The  mercury  would  have 
been  frozen  in  its  ball,  as  below  forty-two  degrees  below 
zero  it  is  no  longer  liquid.  But  Barbicane  had  furnished 
himself  with  a  spirit  thermometer  on  Wafferdin's  system, 
which  gives  the  minima  of  excessively  low  temperatures. 

Before  beginning  the  experiment,  this  instrument  was 
compared  with  an  ordinary  one,  and  then  Barbicane  pre- 
pared to  use  it. 

"How  shall  we  set  about  it?"  asked  Nicholl. 

"Nothing  is  easier,"  replied  Michel  Ardan,  who  was 
never  at  a  loss.  "  We  open  the  scuttle  rapidly ;  throw  out 
the  instrument;  it  follows  the  projectile  with  exemplary 
docility ;  and  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after,  draw  it  in." 

"With  the  hand?"  asked  Barbicane. 

"  With  the  hand,"  repiled  Michel. 

"Well  then,  my  friend,  do  not  expose  yourself,"  an- 
swered Barbicane,  "  for  the  hand  that  you  draw  in  again 
will  be  nothing  but  a  stump  frozen  and  deformed  by  the 
frightful  cold." 

"Really!" 

"You  will  feel  as  if  you  had  had  a  terrible  burn,  like 
that  of  iron  at  a  white  heat;  for  whether  the  heat  leaves 
our  bodies  briskly  or  enters  briskly,  it  is  exactly  the  same 
thing.  Besides,  I  am  not  at  all  certain  that  the  objects  we 
have  thrown  out  are  still  following  us." 

"Why  not?"  asked  Nicholl. 

"  Because,  if  we  are  passing  through  an  atmosphere  of 
the  slightest  density,  these  objects  will  be  retarded.  Again, 
the  darkness  prevents  our  seeing  if  they  still  float  around 
us.  But  in  order  not  to  expose  ourselves  to  the  loss  of  our 
thermometer,  we  will  fasten  it,  and  we  can  then  more  easily 
pull  it  back  again." 

Barbicane's  advice  was  followed.  Through  the  scuttle 
rapidly  opened,  Nicholl  threw  out  the  instrument  which  was 
held  by  a  short  cord,  so  that  it  might  be  more  easily  drawn 
up.  The  scuttle  had  not  been  opened  more  than  a  second, 
but  that  second  had  sufficed  to  let  in  a  most  intense  cold, 


330  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"The  devil!"  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan,  "it  is  cold 
enough  to  freeze  a  white  bear." 

Barbicane  waited  until  half  an  hour  had  elapsed,  which 
was  more  than  time  enough  to  allow  the  instrument  to  fall 
to  the  level  of  the  surrounding  temperature.  Then  it  was 
rapidly  pulled  in. 

Barbicane  calculated  the  quality  of  spirits  of  wine  over- 
flowed into  the  little  phial  soldered  to  the  lower  part  of  the 
instrument,  and  said: 

"  A  hundred  and  forty  degrees  centigrade  below  zero ! " 

M.  Pouillet  was  right  and  Fourier  wrong.  That  was 
the  undoubted  temperature  of  the  starry  space.  Such  is, 
perhaps,  that  of  the  lunar  continents,  when  the  orb  of  night 
has  lost  by  radiation  all  the  heat  which  fifteen  days  of  sun 
have  poured  into  her. 


CHAPTER  XV 

HYPERBOLA  OR  PARABOLA 

We  may,  perhaps,  be  astonished  to  find  Barbicane  and 
his  companions  so  little  occupied  with  the  future  reserved 
for  them  in  their  metal  prison  which  was  bearing  them 
through  the  infinity  of  space.  Instead  of  asking  where 
they  were  going,  they  passed  their  time  making  experiments, 
as  if  they  had  been  quietly  installed  in  their  own  study. 

We  might  answer  that  men  so  strong-minded  were  above 
such  anxieties — that  they  did  not  trouble  themselves  about 
such  trifles — and  that  they  had  something  else  to  do  than  to; 
occupy  their  minds  with  the  future. 

The  truth  was  that  they  were  not  masters  of  their  pro- 
jectile; they  could  neither  check  its  course,  nor  alter  its 
direction. 

A  sailor  can  change  the  head  of  his  ship  as  he  pleases; 
an  aeronaut  can  give  a  vertical  motion  to  his  balloon. 
They,  on  the  contrary,  had  no  power  over  their  vehicle. 
Every  maneuver  was  forbidden.  Hence  the  inclination 
to  let  things  alone,  or  as  the  sailors  say,  "  let  her  run." 

Where  did  they  find  themselves  at  this  moment,  at  eight 
o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  day  called  upon  the  earth 
the  6th  of  December?  Very  certainly  in  the  neighborhood 
of  the  moon,  and  even  near  enough  for  her  to  look  to  them 


HYPERBOLA  OR  PARABOLA      331 

like  an  enormous  black  screen  upon  the  firmament.  As  to 
the  distance  which  separated  them,  it  was  impossible  to  es- 
timate it.  The  projectile,  held  by  some  unaccountable 
force,  had  been  within  four  miles  of  grazing  the  satellite's 
north  pole. 

But  since  entering  the  cone  of  shadow  these  last  two 
hours,  had  the  distance  increased  or  diminished?  Every 
point  of  mark  was  wanting  by  which  to  estimate  both  the 
direction  and  the  speed  of  the  projectile. 

Perhaps  it  was  rapidly  leaving  the  disc,  so  that  it  would 
soon  quit  the  pure  shadow.  Perhaps,  again,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  might  be  nearing  it  so  much  that  in  a  short  time  it 
might  strike  some  high  point  on  the  invisible  hemisphere, 
whch  would  doubtlessly  have  ended  the  journey  much  to 
the  detriment  of  the  travelers. 

A  discussion  arose  on  this  subject,  and  Michel  Ardan, 
always  ready  with  an  explanation,  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that 
the  projectile,  held  by  the  lunar  attraction,  would  end  by 
falling  on  the  surface  of  the  terrestrial  globe  like  an  aerolite. 

"  First  of  all,  my  friend,"  answered  Barbicane,  "  every 
aerolite  does  not  fall  to  the  earth;  it  is  only  a  small  propor- 
tion which  do  so;  and  if  we  had  passed  into  an  aerolite,  it 
does  not  necessarily  follow  that  we  should  ever  reach  the 
surface  of  the  moon." 

"But  how  if  we  get  near  enough?"  replied  Michel. 

"  Pure  mistake,"  replied  Barbicane.  "  Have  you  not 
seen  shooting  stars  rush  through  the  sky  by  thousands  at 
certain  seasons  ?  " 

"Yes." 

"  Well,  these  stars,  or  rather  corpuscules,  only  shine  when 
they  are  heated  by  gliding  over  the  atmospheric  layers. 
Now,  if  they  enter  the  atmosphere,  they  pass  at  least  within 
forty  miles  of  the  earth,  but  they  seldom  fall  upon  it.  The 
same  with  our  projectile.  It  may  approach  very  near  to  the 
moon,  and  yet  not  fall  upon  it." 

"  But  then,"  asked  Michel,  "  I  shall  be  curious  to  know 
how  our  erring  vehicle  will  act  in  space?  " 

"  I  see  but  two  hypotheses,"  replied  Barbicane,  after  some 
moments  reflection. 

"  What  are  they?  " 

"  The  projectile  has  the  choice  between  two  mathematical 
curves,  and  it  will  follow  one  or  the  other  according  to  the 


332  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

speed  with  which  it  is  animated,  and  which  at  this  moment 
I  cannot  estimate." 

"  Yes,"  said  Nicholl,  "  it  will  follow  either  a  parabola 
or  a  hyperbola." 

"  Just  so,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  With  a  certain  speed  it 
will  assume  the  parabola,  and  with  a  greater  the  hyperbola." 

"  I  like  those  grand  words,"  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan ; 
"  one  knows  directly  what  they  mean.  And  pray  what  is 
your  parabola,  if  you  please?" 

"  My  friend,"  answered  the  captain,  "  the  parabola  is  a 
curve  of  the  second  order,  the  result  of  a  section  of  a  cone 
intersected  by  a  plane  parallel  to  one  of  its  sides." 

"Ah!  ah!  "  said  Michel,  in  a  satisfied  tone. 

"  It  is  very  nearly,"  continued  Nicholl,  "  the  course  de- 
scribed by  a  bomb  launched  from  a  mortar." 

"Perfect!     And  the  hyperbola  ?  " 

"  The  hyperbola,  Michel,  is  a  curve  of  the  second  order, 
produced  by  the  intersection  of  a  conic  surface  and  a  plane 
parallel  to  its  axis,  and  constitutes  two  branches  separated 
one  from  the  other,  both  tending  indefinitely  in  the  two 
directions." 

"  Is  it  possible ! "  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan  in  a  serious 
tone,  as  if  they  had  told  him  of  some  serious  event.  "  What 
I  particularly  like  in  your  definition  of  the  hyperbola  (I 
was  going  to  say  hyperblague)  is  that  it  is  still  more  ob- 
scure than  the  word  you  pretend  to  define." 

Nicholl  and  Barbicane  cared  little  for  Michel  Ardan's 
fun.  They  were  deep  in  a  scientific  discussion.  What 
curve  would  the  projectile  follow?  was  their  hobby.  One 
maintained  the  hyperbola,  the  other  the  parabola.  They 
gave  each  other  reasons  bristling  with  x.  Their  arguments 
were  couched  in  language  which  made  Michel  jump.  Their 
discussion  was  hot,  and  neither  would  give  up  his  chosen 
curve  to  his  adversary. 

This  scientific  dispute  lasted  so  long  that  it  made  Michel 
very  impatient. 

"  Now,  gentlemen  co-sines,  will  you  cease  to  throw 
parabolas  and  hyperbolas  at  each  other's  heads?  I  want  to 
undertsand  the  only  interesting  question  in  the  whole  affair. 
We  shall  follow  one  or  other  of  these  curves?  Good. 
But  where  will  they  lead  us  to  ?  " 

"  Nowhere,"  replied  Nicholl. 


HYPERBOLA  OR  PARABOLA     .  333 

"  How,  nowhere?  " 

"  Evidently,"  said  Barbicane,  "  they  are  open  curves, 
which  may  be  prolonged  indefinitely." 

"Ah,  savants!"  cried  Michel;  "and  what  are  either  the 
one  or  the  other  to  us  from  the  moment  we  know  that  they 
equally  lead  us  into  infinite  space?  " 

Barbicane  and  Nicholl  could  not  forbear  smiling.  They 
had  just  been  creating  "  art  for  art's  sake."  Never  had  so 
idle  a  question  been  raised  at  such  an  inopportune  moment. 
The  sinister  truth  remained  that,  whether  hyperbolically  or 
parabolically  borne  away,  the  projectile  would  never  again 
meet  either  the  earth  or  the  moon. 

What  would  become  of  these  bold  travelers  in  the  im- 
mediate future?  If  they  did  not  die  of  hunger,  if  they  did 
not  die  of  thirst,  in  some  days,  when  the  gas  failed,  they 
would  die  from  want  of  air,  unless  the  cold  had  killed  them 
first.  Still,  important  as  it  was  to  economize  the  gas,  the 
excessive  lowness  of  the  surrounding  temperature  obliged 
them  to  consume  a  certain  quantity.  Strictly  speaking, 
they  could  do  without  its  light,  but  not  without  its  heat. 
Fortunately  the  caloric  generated  by  Reiset's  and  Regnaut's 
apparatus  raised  the  temperature  of  the  interior  of  the  pro- 
jectile a  little,  and  without  much  expenditure  they  were  able 
to  keep  it  bearable. 

But  observations  had  now  become  very  difficult.  The 
dampness  of  the  projectile  was  condensed  on  the  windows 
and  congealed  immediately.  This  cloudiness  had  to  be  dis- 
persed continually.  In  any  case  they  might  hope  to  be  able 
to  discover  some  phenomena  of  the  highest  interest. 

But  up  to  this  time  the  disc  remained  dumb  and  dark.  It 
did  not  answer  the  multiplicity  of  questions  put  by  these 
ardent  minds;  a  matter  which  drew  this  reflection  from 
Michel,  apparently  a  just  one. 

"  If  ever  we  begin  this  journey  over  again,  we  shall  do 
well  to  choose  the  time  when  the  moon  is  at  the  full." 

"  Certainly,"  said  Nicholl,  "  that  circumstance  will  be 
more  favorable.  I  allow  that  the  moon,  immersed  in  the 
sun's  rays,  will  not  be  visible  during  the  transit,  but  instead 
we  should  see  the  earth,  which  would  be  full.  And  what  is 
more,  if  we  were  drawn  round  the  moon,  as  at  this  moment, 
we  should  at  least  have  the  advantage  of  seeing  the  invisible 
part  of  her  clisc  magnificently  lit." 


334  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"  Well  said,  Nicholl,"  replied  Michel  Ardan.  "  What  do 
you  think,  Barbicane  ?  " 

"  I  think  this,"  answered  the  grave  president:  "  If  ever  we 
begin  this  journey  again,  we  shall  start  at  the  same  time  and 
under  the  same  conditions.  Suppose  we  had  attained  our 
end,  would  it  not  have  been  better  to  have  found  continents 
in  broad  daylight,  than  a  country  plunged  in  utter  dark- 
ness ?  Would  not  our  first  installation  have  been  made  un- 
der better  circumstances?  Yes,  evidently.  As  to  the  in- 
visible side,  we  could  have  visited  it  in  our  exploring  expedi- 
tions on  the  lunar  globe.  So  that  the  time  of  the  full  moon 
was  well  chosen.  But  we  ought  to  have  arrived  at  the  end ; 
and  in  order  to  have  so  arrived,  we  ought  to  have  suffered 
no  deviation  on  the  road." 

"  I  have  nothing  to  say  to  that,"  answered  Michel  Ardan. 
"  Here  is,  however,  a  good  opportunity  lost  of  observing 
the  other  side  of  the  moon." 

But  the  projectile  was  now  describing  in  the  shadow  that 
incalculable  course  which  no  sight-mark  would  allow  them 
to  ascertain.  Had  its  direction  been  altered,  either  by  the 
influence  of  the  lunar  attraction,  or  by  the  action  of  some 
unknown  star?  Barbicane  could  not  say.  But  a  change 
h?d  taken  place  in  the  relative  position  of  the  vehicle;  and 
Barbicane  verified  it  about  four  in  the  morning. 

The  change  consisted  in  this,  that  the  base  of  the  pro- 
jectile had  turned  towards  the  moon's  surface,  and  was  so 
held  by  a  perpendicular  passing  through  its  axis.  The  at- 
traction, that  is  to  say  the  weight,  had  brought  about  this 
alteration.  The  heaviest  part  of  the  projectile  inclined  to- 
wards the  invisible  disc  as  if  it  would  fall  upon  it. 

Was  it  falling?  Were  the  travelers  attaining  that  much- 
desired  end?  No.  And  the  observation  of  a  sign-point, 
quite  inexplicable  in  itself,  showed  Barbicane  that  his  pro- 
jectile was  not  nearing  the  moon,  and  that  it  had  shifted 
by  following  an  almost  concentric  curve. 

This  point  of  mark  was  a  luminous  brightness,  which 
Nicholl  sighted  suddenly,  on  the  limit  of  the  horizon  formed 
by  the  black  disc.  This  point  could  not  be  confounded  with 
a  star.  It  was  a  reddish  incandescence  which  increased  by 
degrees,  a  decided  proof  that  the  projectile  was  shifting 
towards  it  and  not  falling  normally  on  the  surface  of  the 
moon. 


HYPERBOLA  OR  PARABOLA      335 

"A  volcano!  it  is  a  volcano  in  action!"  cried  Nicholl; 
"  a  disemboweling  of  the  interior  fires  of  the  moon !  That 
world  is  not  quite  extinguished." 

"  Yes,  an  eruption,"  replied  Barbicane,  who  was  carefully 
studying  the  phenomenon  through  his  night-glass.  "  What 
should  it  be,  if  not  a  volcano?  " 

"But  then,"  said  Michel  Ardan,  "in  order  to  maintain 
that  combustion,  there  must  be  air.  So  an  atmosphere 
does  surround  that  part  of  the  moon." 

"  Perhaps  so,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  but  not  necessarily. 
The  volcano,  by  the  decomposition  of  certain  substances, 
can  provide  its  own  oxygen,  and  thus  throw  flames  into 
space.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  deflagration,  by  the  intense 
brilliancy  of  the  substances  in  combustion,  is  produced  in 
pure  oxygen.  We  must  not  be  in  a  hurry  to  proclaim  the 
existence  of  a  lunar  atmosphere." 

The  fiery  mountain  must  have  been  situated  about  the 
450  south  latitude  on  the  invisible  part  of  the  disc;  but,  to 
Barbicane's  great  displeasure,  the  curve  which  the  projectile 
was  describing  was  taking  it  far  from  the  point  indicated 
by  the  eruption.  Thus  he  could  not  determine  its  nature 
exactly.  Half  an  hour  after  being  sighted,  this  luminous 
point  had  disappeared  behind  the  dark  horizon ;  but  the  veri- 
fication of  this  phenomenon  was  of  considerable  conse- 
quence in  their  Selenographic  studies.  It  proved  that  all 
heat  had  not  yet  disappeared  from  the  bowels  of  this  globe; 
and  where  heat  exists,  who  can  affirm  that  the  vegetable 
kingdom,  nay,  even  the  animal  kingdom  itself,  has  not  up 
to  this  time  resisted  all  destructive  influences?  The  ex- 
istence of  this  volcano  in  eruption,  unmistakably  seen  by 
these  earthly  savants,  would  doubtless  give  rise  to  many 
theories  favorable  to  the  grave  question  of  the  habitability 
<pi  the  moon. 

Barbicane  allowed  himself  to  be  carried  away  by  these 
reflections.  He  forgot  himself  in  a  deep  reverie  in  which 
the  mysterious  destiny  of  the  lunar  world  was  uppermost. 
He  was  seeking  to  combine  together  the  facts  observed  up 
to  that  time,  when  a  new  incident  recalled  him  briskly  to 
reality.  This  incident  was  more  than  a  cosmical  phenom- 
enon; it  was  a  threatened  danger,  the  consequences  of 
which  might  be  disastrous  in  the  extreme. 

Suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  the  ether,  in  the  profound 


336  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

darkness,  an  enormous  mass  appeared.  It  was  like  a  moon, 
but  an  incandescent  moon,  whose  brilliancy  was  all  the  more 
intolerable  as  it  cut  sharply  on  the  frightful  darkness  of 
space.  This  mass,  of  a  circular  form,  threw  a  light  which 
filled  the  projectile.  The  forms  of  Barbicane,  Nicholl  and 
Michel  Ardan,  bathed  in  its  white  sheets,  assumed  that  livid 
spectral  appearance  which  physicians  produce  with  the  ficti- 
tious light  of  alcohol  impregnated  with  salt. 

"  By  Jove !  "  cried  Michel  Ardan,  "  we  are  hideous. 
What  is  that  ill-conditioned  moon?" 

"  A  meteor,"  replied  Barbicane. 

"  A  meteor  burning  in  space?  " 

"Yes." 

This  shooting  globe  suddenly  appearing  in  shadow  at  a 
distance  of  at  most  200  miles,  ought,  according  to  Bar- 
bicane, to  have  a  diameter  of  2,000  yards.  It  advanced  at 
a  speed  of  about  one  mile  and  a  half  per  second.  It  cut 
the  projectile's  path,  and  must  reach  it  in  some  minutes. 
As  it  approached  it  grew  to  enormous  proportions. 

Imagine  if  possible,  the  situation  of  the  travelers!  It  is 
impossible  to  describe  it.  In  spite  of  their  courage,  their 
sang-froid,  their  carelessness  of  danger,  they  were  mute, 
motionless  with  stiffened  limbs,  a  prey  to  frightful  terror. 
Their  projectile,  the  course  of  which  they  could  not  alter, 
was  rushing  straight  on  this  ignited  mass,  more  intense  than 
the  open  mouth  of  an  oven.  It  seemed  as  though  they  were 
being  precipitated  towards  an  abyss  of  fire. 

Barbicane  had  seized  the  hands  of  his  two  companions, 
and  all  three  looked  through  their  half-open  eyelids  upon 
that  asteroid  heated  to  a  white  heat.  If  thought  was  not 
destroyed  within  them,  if  their  brains  still  worked  amidst 
all  this  awe,  they  must  have  given  themselves  up  for  lost. 

Two  minutes  after  the  sudden  appearance  of  the  meteor 
(to  them  two  centuries  of  anguish)  the  projectile  seemed 
almost  about  to  strike  it  when  the  globe  of  fire  burst  like 
a  bomb,  but  without  making  any  noise  in  that  void  where 
sound,  which  is  but  the  agitation  of  the  layers  of  air,  could 
not  be  generated. 

Nicholl  uttered  a  cry,  and  he  and  his  companions  rushed 
to  the  scuttle.  What  a  sight!  What  pen  can  describe  it? 
What  palette  is  rich  enough  in  colors  to  reproduce  so 
magnificent  a  spectacle? 

V.  Ill  Verne 


HYPERBOLA  OR  PARABOLA      337 

It  was  like  the  opening  of  a  crater,  like  the  scattering  of 
an  immense  conflagration.  Thousands  of  luminous  frag- 
ments lit  up  and  irradiated  space  with  their  fires.  Every 
size,  every  color,  was  there  intermingled.  There  were  rays 
of  yellow  and  pale  yellow,  red,  green,  gray — a  crown  of  fire- 
works of  all  colors.  Of  the  enormous  and  much-dreaded 
globe  there  remained  nothing  but  these  fragments  carried  in 
all  directions,  now  become  asteroids  in  their  turn,  some 
flaming  like  a  sword,  some  surrounded  by  a  whitish  cloud, 
and  others  leaving  behind  them  trains  of  brilliant  cosmical 
dust. 

These  incandescent  blocks  crossed  and  struck  each  other, 
scattering  still  smaller  fragments,  some  of  which  struck  the 
projectile.  Its  left  scuttle  was  even  cracked  by  a  violent 
shock.  It  seemed  to  be  floating  amidst  a  hail  of  howitzer 
shells,  the  smallest  of  which  might  destroy  it  instantly. 

The  light  which  saturated  the  ether  was  so  wonderfully 
intense,  that  Michel  Ardan,  drawing  Barbicane  and  Nicholl 
to  his  window,  exclaimed,  "The  invisible  moon,  visible 
at  last ! " 

And  through  a  luminous  emanation,  which  lasted  some 
seconds,  the  whole  three  caught  a  glimpse  of  that  mys- 
terious disc  which  the  eye  of  man  now  saw  for  the  first 
time.  What  could  they  distinguish  at  a  distance  which  they 
could  not  estimate?  Some  lengthened  bands  along  the  disc, 
real  clouds  formed  in  the  midst  of  a  very  confined  atmos- 
phere, from  which  emerged  not  only  all  the  mountains, 
but  also  projections  of  less  importance;  its  circles,  its  yawn- 
ing craters,  as  capriciously  placed  as  on  the  visible  surface. 
Then  immense  spaces,  no  longer  arid  plains,  but  real  seas, 
oceans,  widely  distributed,  reflecting  on  their  liquid  surface 
all  the  dazzling  magic  of  the  fires  of  space ;  and,  lastly,  on 
the  surface  of  the  continents,  large  dark  masses,  looking 
like  immense  forests  under  the  rapid  illumination  of  a 
brilliance. 

Was  it  an  illusion,  a  mistake,  an  optical  illusion?  Could 
they  give  a  scientific  assent  to  an  observation  so  superficially 
obtained?  Dared  they  pronounce  upon  the  question  of  its 
habitability  after  so  slight  a  glimpse  of  the  invisible  disc? 

But  the  lightnings  in  space  subsided  by  degrees ;  its  acci- 
dental brilliancy  died  away;  the  asteroids  dispersed  in  dif- 
ferent directions  and  were  extinguished  in  the  distance. 


33$  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

The  ether  returned  to  its  accustomed  darkness;  the  stars, 
eclipsed  for  a  moment,  again  twinkled  in  the  firmament, 
and  the  disc,  so  hastily  discerned,  was  again  buried  in  im- 
penetrable night. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

THE    SOUTHERN    HEMISPHERE 

The  projectile  had  just  escaped  a  terrible  danger,  and  a 
very  unforeseen  one.  Who  would  have  thought  of  such  a 
rencontre  with  meteors?  These  erring  bodies  might  create 
serious  perils  for  the  travelers.  They  were  to  them  so 
many  sandbanks  upon  that  sea  of  ether  which,  less  fortu- 
nate than  sailors,  they  could  not  escape.  But  did  these 
adventurers  complain  of  space?  No,  not  since  nature  had 
given  them  the  splendid  sight  of  a  cosmical  meteor  bursting 
from  expansion,  since  this  inimitable  firework,  which  no 
Ruggieri  could  imitate,  had  lit  up  for  some  seconds  the  in- 
visible glory  of  the  moon.  In  that  flash,  continents,  seas, 
and  forests  had  become  visible  to  them.  Did  an  atmos- 
phere, then,  bring  to  this  unknown  face  its  life-giving 
atoms?  Questions  still  insoluble,  and  forever  closed 
against  human  curiosity ! 

It  was  then  half -past  three  in  the  afternoon.  The  pro- 
jectile was  following  its  curvilinear  direction  round  the 
moon.  Had  its  course  been  again  altered  by  the  meteor? 
It  was  to  be  feared  so.  But  the  projectile  must  describe 
a  curve  unalterably  determined  by  the  laws  of  mechanical 
reasoning.  Barbicane  was  inclined  to  believe  that  this 
curve  would  be  rather  a  parabola  than  a  hyperbola.  But 
admitting  the  parabola,  the  projectile  must  quickly  have 
passed  through  the  cone  of  shadow  projected  into  space 
opposite  the  sun.  This  cone,  indeed,  is  very  narrow,  the 
angular  diameter  of  the  moon  being  so  little  when  com- 
pared with  the  diameter  of  the  orb  of  the  day;  and  up  to 
this  time  the  projectile  had  been  floating  in  this  deep  sha- 
dow. Whatever  had  been  its  speed  (and  it  could  not  have 
been  insignificant)  its  period  of  occultation  continued. 
That  was  evident,  but  perhaps  that  would  not  have  been 
the  case  in  a  supposed  rigidly  parabolical  trajectory,— a 
new  problem  which  tormented  Barbicane's  brain,  impris- 


THE  SOUTHERN  HEMISPHERE  339 

oned  as  he  was  in  a  circle  of  unknowns  which  he  could  not 
unravel. 

Neither  of  the  travelers  thought  of  taking  an  instant's 
repose.  Each  one  watched  for  an  unexpected  fact,  which 
might  throw  some  new  light  on  their  uranographic  studies. 
About  five  o'clock,  Michel  Ardan  distributed,  under  the 
name  of  dinner,  some  pieces  of  bread  and  cold  meat, 
which  were  quickly  swallowed  without  either  of  them  aban- 
doning their  scuttle,  the  glass  of  which  was  incessantly  en- 
crusted by  the  condensation  of  vapor. 

About  forty-five  minutes  past  five  in  the  evening, 
Nicholl,  armed  with  his  glass,  sighted  towards  the  southern 
border  of  the  moon,  and  in  the  direction  followed  by  the 
projectile,  some  bright  points  cut  upon  the  dark  shield 
of  the  sky.  They  looked  like  a  succession  of  sharp  points 
lengthened  into  a  tremulous  line.  They  were  very  bright. 
Such  appeared  the  terminal  line  of  the  moon  when  in  one 
of  her  octants. 

They  could  not  be  mistaken.  It  was  no  longer  a  simple 
meteor.  This  luminous  ridge  had  neither  color  nor  motion. 
Nor  was  it  a  volcano  in  eruption.  And  Barbicane  did  not 
hesitate  to  pronounce  upon  it. 

"  The  sun !  "  he  exclaimed. 

"  What!  the  sun?  "  answered  Nicholl  and  Michel  Ardan. 

"  Yes,  my  friends,  it  is  the  radiant  orb  itself  lighting  up 
the  summit  of  the  mountains  situated  on  the  southern  bor- 
ders of  the  moon.  We  are  evidently  nearing  the  south 
pole." 

"After  having  passed  the  north  pole,"  replied  Michel. 
"  We  have  made  the  circuit  of  our  satellite,  then  ?  " 

"Yes,  my  good  Michel." 

"  Then,  no  more  hyperbolas,  no  more  parabolas,  no  more 
open  curves  to  fear?  " 

"  No,  but  a  closed  curve." 

"  Which  is  called ?" 

"An  ellipse.  Instead  of  losing  itself  in  interplanetary 
space,  it  is  probable  that  the  projectile  will  describe  an 
elliptical  orbit  around  the  moon." 

"Indeed!" 

"  And  that  it  will  become  her  satellite." 

"  Moon  of  the  moon ! "  cried  Michel  Ardan. 

"  Only,  I  would  have  you  observe,  my  worthy  friend," 


34Q  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

replied  Barbicane,  "  that  we  are  none  the  less  lost  for 
that." 

"  Yes,  in  another  manner,  and  much  more  pleasantly," 
answered  the  careless  Frenchman  with  his  most  amiable 
smile. 

CHAPTER  XVII 

TYCHO 

At  six  in  the  evening  the  projectile  passed  the  south  pole 
at  less  than  forty  miles  off,  a  distance  equal  to  that  already 
reached  at  the  north  pole.  The  elliptical  curve  was  being 
rigidly  carried  out. 

At  this  moment  the  travelers  once  more  entered  the 
blessed  rays  of  the  sun.  They  saw  once  more  those  stars 
which  move  slowly  from  east  to  west.  The  radiant  orb 
was  saluted  by  a  triple  hurrah.  With  its  light  it  also  sent 
heat,  which  soon  pierced  the  metal  walls.  The  glass  re- 
sumed its  accustomed  appearance.  The  layers  of  ice  melted 
as  if  by  enchantment;  and  immediately,  for  economy's 
sake,  the  gas  was  put  out,  the  air  apparatus  alone  con- 
suming its  usual  quantity. 

"Ah !  "  said  Nicholl,  "  these  rays  of  heat  are  good.  With 
what  impatience  must  the  Selenites  wait  the  reappearance 
of  the  orb  of  day." 

"  Yes,"  replied  Michel  Ardan,  "  imbibing  as  it  were  the 
brilliant  ether,  light  and  heat,  all  life  is  contained  in  them." 

At  this  moment  the  bottom  of  the  projectile  deviated 
somewhat  from  the  lunar  surface,  in  order  to  follow  the 
slightly  lengthened  elliptical  orbit.  From  this  point,  had 
the  earth  been  at  the  full,  Barbicane  and  his  companions 
could  have  seen  it,  but  immersed  in  the  sun's  irradiation 
she  was  quite  invisible.  Another  spectacle  attracted  their 
attention,  that  of  the  southern  part  of  the  moon,  brought 
by  the  glasses  to  within  450  yards.  They  did  not  again 
leave  the  scuttles,  and  noted  every  detail  of  this  fantastical 
continent. 

Mounts  Doerfel  and  Leibnitz  formed  two  separate 
groups  very  near  the  south  pole.  The  first  group  extended 
from  the  pole  to  the  eighty-fourth  parallel,  on  the  eastern 
part  of  the  orb;  the  second  occupied  the  eastern  border,  ex- 
tending from  the  65  °  of  latitude  to  the  pole. 


TYCHO  341 

On  their  capriciously  formed  ridge  appeared  dazzling 
sheets,  as  mentioned  by  Pere  Secchi.  With  more  certainty 
than  the  illustrious  Roman  astronomer,  Barbicane  was  en- 
abled to  recognize  their  nature. 

"  They  are  snow,"  he  exclaimed. 

"Snow?"  repeated  Nicholl. 

"Yes,  Nicholl,  snow;  the  surface  of  which  is  deeply 
frozen.  See  how  they  reflect  the  luminous  rays.  Cooled 
lava  would  never  give  out  such  intense  reflection.  There 
must  then  be  water,  there  must  be  air  on  the  moon.  As  little 
as  you  please,  but  the  fact  can  no  longer  be  contested."  No, 
it  could  not  be.  And  if  ever  Barbicane  should  see  the 
earth  again,  his  notes  will  bear  witness  to  this  great  fact 
in  his  Selenographic  observations. 

These  mountains  of  Doerfel  and  Leibnitz  rose  in  the 
midst  of  plains  of  a  medium  extent,  which  were  bounded 
by  an  indefinite  succession  of  circles  and  annular  ramparts. 
These  two  chains  are  the  only  ones  not  within  this  region 
of  circles.  Comparatively  but  slightly  marked,  they  throw 
up  here  and  there  some  sharp  points,  the  highest  summit  of 
which  attains  an  altitude  of  24,600  feet. 

But  the  projectile  was  high  above  all  this  landscape,  and 
the  projections  disappeared  in  the  intense  brilliancy  of  the 
disc.  And  to  the  eyes  of  the  travelers  there  reappeared 
that  original  aspect  of  the  lunar  landscapes,  raw  in  tone, 
without  gradation  of  colors,  and  without  degrees  of  sha- 
dow, roughly  black  and  white,  from  the  want  of  diffusion 
of  light. 

_  But  the  sight  of  this  desolate  world  did  not  fail  to  cap- 
tivate them  by  its  very  strangeness.  They  were  moving 
over  this  region  as  if  they  had  been  borne  on  the  breath 
oi  some  storm,  watching  heights  defile  under  their  feet, 
piercing  the  cavities  with  their  eyes,  going  down  into  the 
rifts,  climbing  the  ramparts,  sounding  these  mysterious 
holes,  and  leveling  all  cracks.  But  no  trace  of  vegetation, 
no  appearance  of  cities;  nothing  but  stratification,  beds  of 
lava,  overflowings  polished  like  immense  mirrors,  reflecting 
the  sun's  rays  with  overpowering  brilliancy.  Nothing  be- 
longing to  the  living  world — everything  to  a  dead  world, 
where  avalanches,  rolling  from  the  summits  of  the  moun- 
tains, would  disperse  noiselessly  at  the  bottom  of  the  abyss, 
retaining  the  motion  but  wanting  the  sound.     In  any  case 


342  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

it  was  the  image  of  death,  without  its  being  possible  even 
to  say  that  life  had  ever  existed  there. 

Michel  Ardan,  however,  thought  he  recognized  a  heap 
of  ruins,  to  which  he  drew  Barbicane's  attention.  It  was 
about  the  8oth  parallel,  in  300  longitude.  This  heap  of 
stones,  rather  regularly  placed,  represented  a  vast  fortress, 
overlooking  a  long  rift,  which  in  former  days  had  served 
as  a  bed  to  the  rivers  of  prehistorical  times.  Not  far  from 
that,  rose  to  a  height  of  17,400  feet  the  annular  mountain 
of  Short,  equal  to  the  Asiatic  Caucasus.  Michel  Ardan, 
with  his  accustomed  ardor,  maintained  "  the  evidences  "  of 
his  fortress.  Beneath  it  he  discerned  the  dismantled  ram- 
parts of  a  town ;  here  the  still  intact  arch  of  a  portico,  there 
two  or  three  columns  lying  under  their  base ;  farther  on,  a 
succession  of  arches  which  must  have  supported  the  conduit 
of  an  aqueduct;  in  another  part  the  sunken  pillars  of  a  gi- 
gantic bridge,  run  into  the  thickest  parts  of  the  rift.  He 
distinguished  all  this,  but  with  so  much  imagination  in  his 
glance,  and  through  glasses  so  fantastical,  that  we  must 
mistrust  his  observation.  But  who  could  affirm,  who  would 
dare  to  say,  that  the  amiable  fellow  did  not  really  see  that 
which  his  two  companions  would  not  see? 

Moments  were  too  precious  to  be  sacrificed  in  idle  dis- 
cussion. The  Selenite  city,  whether  imaginary  or  not,  had 
already  disappeared  afar  off.  The  distance  of  the  pro- 
jectile from  the  lunar  disc  was  on  the  increase,  and  the  de- 
tails of  the  soil  were  being  lost  in  a  confused  jumble.  The 
reliefs,,  the  circles,  the  craters  and  plains  alone  remained, 
and  still  showed  their  boundary  lines  distinctly.  At  this 
moment,  to  the  left,  lay  extended  one  of  the  finest  circles 
of  lunar  orography,  one  of  the  curiosities  of  this  continent. 
It  was  Newton,  which  Barbicane  recognized  without  trouble, 
by  referring  to  the  Mappa  Selenographica. 

Newton  is  situated  in  exactly  yy°  south  latitude,  and 
160  east  longitude.  It  forms  an  annular  crater,  the  ram- 
parts of  which,  rising  to  a  height  of  21,300  feet,  seemed  to 
be  impassible. 

Barbicane  made  his  companions  observe  that  the  height 
of  this  mountain  above  the  surrounding  plain  was  far  from 
equaling  the  depth  of  its  crater.  This  enormous  hole  was 
beyond  all  measurement,  and  formed  a  gloomy  abyss,  the 
bottom  of  which  the  sun's  rays  could  never  reach.    There, 


TYCHO  343 

according  to  Humboldt,  reigns  utter  darkness,  which  the 
light  of  the  sun  and  the  earth  cannot  break.  Mycologists 
could  well  have  made  it  the  mouth  of  hell. 

"  Newton,"  said  Barbicane,  "  is  the  most  perfect  type  of 
these  annular  mountains,  of  which  the  earth  possesses  no 
sample.  They  prove  that  the  moon's  formation,  by  means 
of  cooling,  is  due  to  violent  causes;  for  whilst  under  the 
pressure  of  internal  fires  the  reliefs  rise  to  considerable 
height,  the  depths  withdraw  far  below  the  lunar  level." 

"  I  do  not  dispute  the  fact,"  replied  Michel  Ardan. 

Some  minutes  after  passing  Newton,  the  projectile  di- 
rectly overlooked  the  annular  mountain  of  Moret.  It 
skirted  at  some  distance  the  summits  of  Blancanus,  and  at 
about  half-past  seven  in  the  evening  reached  the  circle  of 
Clavius. 

This  circle,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  the  disc,  is 
situated  in  580  south  lat.,  and  150  east  long.  Its  height 
is  estimated  at  22,950  feet.  The  travelers,  at  a  distance 
of  twenty-four  miles  (reduced  to  four  by  their  glasses), 
could  admire  this  vast  crater  in  its  entirety. 

"  Terrestrial  volcanoes,"  said  Barbicane,  "  are  but  mole- 
hills compared  with  those  of  the  moon.  Measuring  the  old 
craters  formed  by  the  first  eruptions  of  Vesuvius  and  Etna, 
we  find  them  little  more  than  three  miles  in  breadth.  In 
France  the  circle  of  Cantal  measures  six  miles  across;  at 
Ceyland  the  circle  of  the  island  is  forty  miles,  which  is  con- 
sidered the  largest  on  the  globe.  What  are  these  diameters 
against  that  of  Clavius,  which  we  overlook  at  this  mo- 
ment ?  " 

"  What  is  its  breadth?  "  asked  Nicholl. 

"It  is  150  miles,"  replied  Barbicane.  "This  circle  is 
certainly  the  most  important  on  the  moon,  but  many  others 
measure  150,  100,  or  75  miles." 

"  Ah !  my  friends,"  exclaimed  Michel,  "  can  you  picture 
to  yourselves  what  this  now  peaceful  orb  of  night  must 
have  been  when  its  craters,  filled  with  thunderings,  vomited 
at  the  same  time  smoke  and  tongues  of  flame.  What  a 
wonderful  spectacle  then,  and  now  what  decay !  This  moon 
is  nothing  more  than  a  thin  carcass  of  fireworks,  whose 
squibs,  rockets,  serpents  and  suns,  after  a  superb  brilliancy, 
have  left  but  sadly  broken  cases." 

The  projectile  was  still  advancing.     Circles,  craters,  and 


344  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

uprooted  mountains  suceeded  each  other  incessantly.  No 
more  plains;  no  more  seas.  A  never  ending  Switzerland 
and  Norway.  And  lastly,  in  the  center  of  this  region  of 
crevasses,  the  most  splendid  mountain  on  the  lunar  disc,  the 
dazzling  Tycho,  in  which  posterity  will  ever  preserve  the 
name  of  the  illustrious  Danish  astronomer. 

In  observing  the  full  moon  in  a  cloudless  sky  no  one  has 
failed  to  remark  this  brilliant  point  of  the  southern  atmos- 
phere. Michel  Ardan  used  every  metaphor  that  his  imagin- 
ation could  supply  to  designate  it  by.  To  him  this  Tycho 
was  a  focus  of  light,  a  center  of  irradiation,  a  crater  vom- 
iting rays.  It  was  the  tire  of  a  brilliant  wheel,  an  asteria 
enclosing  the  disc  with  its  silver  tentacles,  an  enormous  eye 
filled  with  flames,  a  glory  carved  for  Pluto's  head,  a  star 
launched  by  the  Creator's  hand,  and  crushed  against  the 
face  of  the  moon!  Tycho  forms  such  a  concentration  of 
light  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  can  see  it  without 
glasses,  though  at  a  distance  of  240,000  miles !  Imagine, 
then,  its  intensity  to  the  eye  of  observers  placed  at  a  dis- 
tance of  only  fifty  miles !  Seen  through  thus  pure  ether,  its 
brilliancy  was  so  intolerable  that  Barbicane  and  his  friends 
were  obliged  to  blacken  their  glasses  with  the  gas  smoke 
before  they  could  bear  the  splendor.  Then  silent,  scarcely 
uttering  an  interjection  of  admiration,  they  gazed,  they  con- 
templated. All  their  feelings,  all  their  impressions,  were 
concentrated  in  that  look,  as  under  any  violent  emotion  all 
life  is  concentrated  at  the  heart. 

Tycho  belongs  to  the  system  of  radiating  mountains,  like 
Aristarchus  and  Copernicus;  but  it  is  of  all  the  most  com- 
plete and  decided,  showing  unquestionably  the  frightful  vol- 
canic action  to  which  the  formation  of  the  moon  is  due. 
Tycho  is  situated  in  430  south  lat,  and  120  east  long.  Its 
center  is  occupied  by  a  crater  fifty  miles  broad.  It  assumes 
a  slightly  elliptical  form,  and  is  surrounded  by  an  enclosure 
of  annular  ramparts,  which  on  the  east  and  west  overlook 
the  outer  plain  from  a  height  of  15,000  feet.  It  is  a  group 
of  Mont  Blancs,  placed  round  one  common  center,  and 
crowned  by  radiating  beams. 

What  this  incomparable  mountain  really  is,  with  all  the 
projections  converging  towards  it,  and  the  interior  ex- 
crescences of  its  crater,  photography  itself  could  never  rep- 
resent.    Indeed,  it  is  during  the  full  moon  that  Tycho  is 


TYCHO  34S 

seen  in  all  its  splendor.  Then  all  shadows  disappear,  the 
fore-shortening  of  perspective  disappears,  and  all  proofs 
become  white — a  disagreeable  fact;  for  this  strange  region 
would  have  been  marvelous  if  reproduced  with  photographic 
exactness.  It  is  but  a  group  of  hollows,  craters,  circles,  a 
network  of  crests ;  then,  as  far  as  the  eye  could  see,  a  whole 
volcanic  network  cast  upon  this  encrusted  soil.  One  can 
then  understand  that  the  bubbles  of  this  central  eruption 
have  kept  their  first  form.  Crystallized  by  cooling,  they 
have  stereotyped  that  aspect  which  the  moon  formerly  pre- 
sented when  under  the  Plutonian  forces. 

The  distance  which  separated  the  travelers  from  the 
annular  summits  of  Tycho  was  not  so  great  but  that  they 
could  catch  the  principal  details.  Even  on  the  causeway 
forming  the  fortifications  of  Tycho,  the  mountains  hang- 
ing on  to  the  interior  and  exterior  sloping  flanks  rose  in 
stories  like  gigantic  terraces.  They  appeared  to  be  higher 
by  300  or  400  feet  to  the  west  than  to  the  east.  No  system 
of  terrestrial  encampment  could  equal  these  natural  fortifi- 
cations. A  town  built  at  the  bottom  of  this  circular  cavity 
would  have  been  utterly  inaccessible. 

Inaccessible  and  wonderfully  extended  over  this  soil  cov- 
ered with  picturesque  projections!  Indeed,  nature  had  not 
left  the  bottom  of  this  crater  flat  and  empty.  It  possessed 
its  own  peculiar  orography,  a  mountainous  system,  making 
it  a  world  in  itself.  The  travelers  could  distinguish  clearly 
cones,  central  hills,  remarkable  positions  of  the  soil,  natur- 
ally placed  to  receive  the  chefs-d'cevure  of  Selenite  archi- 
tecture. There  was  marked  out  the  place  for  a  temple, 
here  the  ground  of  a  forum,  on  this  spot  the  plan  of  a 
palace,  in  another  the  plateau  for  a  citadel ;  the  whole  over- 
looked by  a  central  mountain  of  1,500  feet.  A  vast  circle, 
in  which  ancient  Rome  could  have  been  held  in  its  entirety 
ten  times  over. 

"  Ah ! "  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan,  enthusiastic  at  the 
sight ;  "  what  a  grand  town  might  be  constructed  within 
that  ring  of  mountains!  A  quiet  city,  a  peaceful  refuge, 
beyond  all  human  misery.  How  calm  and  isolated  those 
misanthropes,  those  haters  of  humanity  might  live  there, 
and  all  who  have  a  distaste  for  social  life ! " 

"  All !  It  would  be  too  small  for  them,"  replied  Barbi- 
cane  simply. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

GRAVE    QUESTIONS 

But  the  projectile  had  passed  the  enceinte  of  Tycho, 
and  Barbicane  and  his  two  companions  watched  with 
scrupulous  attention  the  brilliant  rays  which  the  celebrated 
mountain  shed  so  curiously  all  over  the  horizon. 

What  was  this  radiant  glory?  What  geological  phe- 
nomenon had  designed  these  ardent  beams?  This  ques- 
tion occupied  Barbicane's  mind. 

Under  his  eyes  ran  in  all  directions  luminous  furrows, 
raised  at  the  edges  and  concave  in  the  center,  some  twelve 
miles,  others  thirty  miles  broad.  These  brilliant  trains  ex- 
tended in  some  places  to  within  600  miles  of  Tycho,  and 
seemed  to  cover,  particularly  towards  the  east,  the  north- 
east and  the  north,  the  half  of  the  southern  hemisphere. 
One  of  these  jets  extended  as  far  as  the  circle  of  Neander, 
situated  on  the  40th  meridian.  Another  by  a  slight  curve 
furrowed  the  Sea  of  Nectar,  breaking  against  the  chain 
of  Pyrenees,  after  a  circuit  of  800  miles.  Others,  towards 
the  west,  covered  the  Sea  of  Clouds  and  the  Sea  of  Hu- 
mors with  a  luminous  network.  What  was  the  origin  of 
these  sparkling  rays,  which  shone  on  the  plains  as  well  as 
on  the  reliefs,  at  whatever  height  they  might  be?  All 
started  from  a  common  center,  the  crater  of  Tycho.  They 
sprang  from  him.  Herschel  attributed  their  brilliancy  to 
currents  of  lava  congealed  by  the  cold ;  an  opinion,  however, 
which  has  not  been  generally  adopted.  Other  astronomers 
have  seen  in  these  inexplicable  rays,  a  kind  of  moraines, 
rows  of  erratic  blocks,  which  had  been  thrown  up  at  the 
period  of  Tycho's  formation. 

"And  why  not?"  asked  Nicholl  of  Barbicane,  who  was 
relating  and  rejecting  these  different  opinions. 

Because  the  regularity  of  these  luminous  lines,  and  the 
violence  necessary  to  carry  volcanic  matter  to  such  dis- 
tances, is  inexplicable." 

"  Eh !  by  Jove !  "  replied  Michel  Ardan,  "  it  seems  easy 
enough  to  me  to  explain  the  origin  of  these  rays." 

"  Indeed  ?  "  said  Barbicane. 

"  Indeed,"  continued  Michel.  "  It  is  enough  to  say  that 
it  is  a  vast  star,  similar  to  that  produced  by  a  ball  or  a 
stone  thrown  at  a  square  of  glass!" 

"  Well,"  replied  Barbicane,  smiling.     "  And  what  hand 

346 


GRAVE    QUESTIONS  347 

would  be  powerful  enough  to  throw  a  ball  to  give  such  a 
shock  as  that  ?  " 

"  The  hand  is  not  necessary,"  answered  Michel,  not  at 
all  confounded ;  "  and  as  to  the  stone,  let  us  suppose  it 
to  be  a  comet." 

"  Ah !  those  much-abused  comets !  "  exclaimed  Barbicane. 
"  My  brave  Michel,  your  explanation  is  not  bad;  but  your 
comet  is  useless.  The  shock  which  produced  that  rent  must 
have  come  from  the  inside  of  the  star.  A  violent  contrac- 
tion of  the  lunar  crust,  while  cooling,  might  suffice  to  im- 
print this  gigantic  star." 

"  A  contraction !  something  like  a  lunar  stomachache," 
said  Michel  Ardan. 

"  Besides,"  added  Barbicane,  "  this  opinion  is  that  of  an 
English  savant,  Nasmyth,  and  it  seems  to  me  to  sufficiently 
explain  the  radiation  of  these  mountains." 

"  That  Nasmyth  was  no  fool !  "  replied  Michel. 

Long  did  the  travelers,  whom  such  a  sight  could  never 
weary,  admire  the  splendors  of  Tycho.  Their  projectile, 
saturated  with  luminous  gleams  in  the  double  irradiation  of 
sun  and  moon,  must  have  appeared  like  an  incandescent 
globe.  They  had  passed  suddenly  from  excessive  cold  to 
intense  heat.  Nature  was  thus  preparing  them  to  become 
Selenites.  Become  Selenites !  That  idea  brought  up  once 
more  the  question  of  the  habitability  of  the  moon.  After 
what  they  had  seen,  could  the  travelers  solve  it?  Would 
they  decide  for  or  against  it?  Michel  Ardan  persuaded 
his  two  friends  to  form  an  opinion,  and  asked  them  directly 
if  they  thought  that  men  and  animals  were  represented  in 
the  lunar  world. 

"I  think  that  we  can  answer,"  said  Barbicane;  "but 
according  to  my  idea  the  question  ought  not  to  be  put 
in  that  form.    I  ask  it  to  be  put  differently." 

"  Put  it  your  own  way,"  replied  Michel. 

"  Here  it  is,"  continued  Barbicane.  "  The  problem  is  a 
double  one,  and  requires  a  double  solution.  Is  the  moon 
habitable?    Has  the  moon  ever  been  inhabited?  " 

"  Good !  "  replied  Nicholl.  "  First  let  us  see  whether  the 
moon  is  habitable." 

"To  tell  the  truth,  I  know  nothing  about  it,"  answered 
Michel. 

"  And  I  answer  in  the  negative,"  continued  Barbicane, 


348  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"  In  her  actual  state,  with  her  surrounding  atmosphere 
certainly  very  much  reduced,  her  seas  for  the  most  part 
dried  up,  her  insufficient  supply  of  water,  restricted  vegeta- 
tion, sudden  alternations  of  cold  and  heat,  her  days  and 
nights  of  354  hours;  the  moon  does  not  seem  habitable  to 
me,  nor  does  she  seem  propitious  to  animal  development, 
nor  sufficient  for  the  wants  of  existence  as  we  understand 
it." 

"I  agree  with  you,"  replied  Nicholl.  "But  is  not  the 
moon  habitable  for  creatures  differently  organized  from 
ourselves  ?  " 

"  That  question  is  more  difficult  to  answer,  but  I  will  try; 
and  I  ask  Nicholl  if  motion  appears  to  him  to  be  a  neces- 
sary result  of  life,  whatever  be  its  organization?  " 

"  Without  a  doubt !  "  answered  Nicholl. 

"  Then,  my  worthy  companion,  I  would  answer  that  we 
have  observed  the  lunar  continent  at  a  distance  of  500  yards 
at  most,  and  that  nothing  seemed  to  us  to  move  on  the 
moon's  surface.  The  presence  of  any  kind  of  life  would 
have  been  betrayed  by  its  attendant  marks,  such  as  divers 
buildings,  and  even  by  ruins.  And  what  have  we  seen? 
Everywhere  and  always  the  geological  works  of  nature, 
never  the  work  of  man.  If,  then,  there  exist  representatives 
of  the  animal  kingdom  on  the  moon,  they  must  have  fled  to 
those  unfathomable  cavities  which  the  eye  can  not  reach; 
which  I  can  not  admit,  for  they  must  have  left  traces  of 
their  passage  on  those  plains  which  the  atmosphere  must 
cover,  however  slightly  raised  it  may  be.  These  traces  are 
nowhere  visible.  There  remains  but  one  hypothesis,  that  of 
a  living  race  to  which  motion,  which  is  life,  is  foreign." 

"  One  mght  as  well  say,  living  creatures  which  do  not 
live,"  replied  Michel. 

"  Just  so,"  said  Barbicane,  "  which  for  us  has  no  mean- 
ing." 

"  Then  we  may  form  our  opinion  ?  "  said  Michel. 

"  Yes,"  replied  Nicholl. 

"Very  well,"  continued  Michel  Ardan,  "the  Scientific 
Commission  assembled  in  the  projectile  of  the  Gun  Club, 
after  having  founded  their  argument  on  facts  recently  ob- 
served, decide  unanimously  upon  the  question  of  the  habit- 
ability  of  the  moon — 'No!  the  moon  is  not  habitable.'" 

This  decision  was  consigned  by  President  Barbicane  to 


GRAVE    QUESTIONS  349 

his  notebook,  where  the  process  of  the  sitting  of  the  6th  of 
December  may  be  seen. 

"  Now,"  said  Nicholl,  "  let  us  attack  the  second  question, 
an  indispensable  complement  of  the  first.  I  ask  the  honor- 
able Commission,  if  the  moon  is  not  habitable,  has  she  ever 
been  inhabited,  Citizen  Barbicane?" 

"  My  friends,"  replied  Barbicane,  "  I  did  not  undertake 
this  journey  in  order  to  form  an  opinion  on  the  past  habit- 
ability  of  our  satellite;  but  I  will  add  that  our  personal 
observations  only  confirm  me  in  this  opinion.  I  believe, 
indeed,  I  affirm,  that  the  moon  has  been  inhabited  by  a  hu- 
man race  organized  like  our  own;  that  she  has  produced 
animals  anatomically  formed  like  the  terrestrial  animals; 
but  I  add  that  these  races,  human  or  animal,  have  had  their 
day,  and  are  now  forever  extinct !  " 

"  Then,"  asked  Michel,  "  the  moon  must  be  older  than 
the  earth  ?  " 

"  No !  "  said  Barbicane  decidedly,  "  but  a  world  which 
has  grown  old  quicker,  and  whose  formation  and  deforma- 
tion have  been  more  rapid.  Relatively,  the  organizing  force 
of  matter  has  been  much  more  violent  in  the  interior  of 
the  moon  than  in  the  interior  of  the  terrestrial  globe.  The 
actual  state  of  this  cracked,  twisted,  and  burst  disc  abund- 
antly proves  this.  The  moon  and  the  earth  were  nothing 
but  gaseous  masses  originally.  These  gases  have  passed 
into  liquid  state  under  different  influences,  and  the  solid 
masses  have  been  formed  later.  But  most  certainly  our 
sphere  was  still  gaseous  or  liquid,  when  the  moon  was  solidi- 
fied by  cooling,  and  had  become  habitable." 

"  I  believe  it,"  said  Nicholl. 

"  Then,"  continued  Barbicane,  "  an  atmosphere  sur- 
rounded it,  the  waters  contained  within  this  gaseous  en- 
velope could  not  evaporate.  Under  the  influence  of  air, 
water,  light,  solar  heat,  and  central  heat,  vegetation  took 
possession  of  the  continents  prepared  to  receive  it,  and  cer- 
tainly life  showed  itself  about  this  period,  for  nature  does 
not  expend  herself  in  vain;  and  a  world  so  wonderfully 
formed  for  habitation  must  necessarily  be  inhabited. 

"  But,"  said  Nicholl,  "  many  phenomena  inherent  in  our 
satellite  might  cramp  the  expansion  of  the  animal  and  vege- 
table kingdom.  For  example,  its  days  and  nights  of  354 
hours?" 


35o  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"At  the  terrestrial  poles  they  last  six  months,"  said 
Michel. 

"An  argument  of  little  value,  since  the  poles  are  not 
inhabited." 

"  Let  us  observe,  my  friends,"  continued  Barbicane, 
"that  if  in  the  actual  state  of  the  moon  its  long  nights  and 
long  days  created  differences  of  temperature  insupport- 
able to  organization,  it  was  not  so  at  the  historical  period 
of  time.  The  atmosphere  enveloped  the  disc  with  a  fluid 
mantle;  vapor  deposited  itself  in  the  shape  of  clouds;  this 
natural  screen  tempered  the  ardor  of  the  solar  rays,  and  re- 
tained the  nocturnal  radition.  Light,  like  heat,  can  diffuse 
itself  in  the  air;  hence  an  equality  between  the  influences 
which  no  longer  exist,  now  that  that  atmosphere  has  almost 
entirely  disappeared.  And  now  I  am  going  to  astonish 
you." 

"Astonish  us?"  said  Michel  Ardan. 

"  I  firmly  believe  that  at  the  period  when  the  moon  was 
inhabited,  the  nights  and  days  were  shorter  and  did  not  last 
354  hours ! " 

"And  why?  "  asked  Nicholl  quickly. 

"  Because  most  probably  then  the  rotary  motion  of  the 
moon  upon  her  axis  was  not  equal  to  her  revolution,  an 
equality  which  presents  each  part  of  her  disc  during  fifteen 
days  to  the  action  of  the  solar  rays." 

"  Granted,"  replied  Nicholl,  "  but  why  should  not  these 
two  motions  have  been  equal,  as  they  are  really  so  ? " 

"  Because  that  equality  has  only  been  determined  by  ter- 
restrial attraction.  And  who  can  say  that  this  attraction 
was  powerful  enough  to  alter  the  motion  of  the  moon  at 
that  period  when  the  earth  was  still  fluid  ?  " 

"Just  so,"  replied  Nicholl;  "and  who  can  say  that  the 
moon  has  always  been  a  satellite  of  the  earth?  " 

"And  who  can  say,"  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan,  "  that  the 
moon  did  not  exist  before  the  earth?  " 

Their  imagination  carried  them  away  into  an  indefinite 
field  of  hypothesis.     Barbicane  sought  to  restrain  them. 

"  These  speculations  are  too  high,"  said  he ;  "  problems  ut- 
terly insoluble.  Do  not  let  us  enter  upon  them.  Let  us 
only  admit  the  insufficiency  of  the  primordial  attraction; 
and  then  by  the  inequality  of  the  two  motions  of  rotation 
and  revolution,  the  days  and  nights  could  have  succeeded 


GRAVE    QUESTIONS  351 

each  other  on  the  moon  as  they  succeed  each  other  on  the 
earth.  Besides,  even  without  these  conditions,  life  was  pos- 
sible." 

"  And  so,"  asked  Michel  Ardan,  "  humanity  has  disap- 
peared from  the  moon  ?  " 

"Yes,"  replied  Barbicane,  "after  having  doubtless  re- 
mained persistently  for  millions  of  centuries;  by  degrees 
the  atmosphere  becoming  rarefied,  the  disc  became  unin- 
habitable, as  the  terrestrial  globe  will  one  day  become  by 
cooling." 

"  By  cooling  ?  " 

"  Certainly,"  replied  Barbicane;  "  as  the  internal  fires  be- 
came extinguished,  and  the  incandescent  matter  concen- 
trated itself,  the  lunar  crust  cooled.  By  degrees  the  conse- 
quences of  these  phenomena  showed  themselves  in  the  disap- 
pearance of  organized  beings,  and  by  the  disappearance  of 
vegetation.  Soon  the  atmosphere  was  rarefied,  probably 
withdrawn  by  terrestrial  attraction;  then  aerial  departure 
of  respirable  air,  and  disappearance  of  water  by  means  of 
evaporation.  At  this  period  the  moon  becoming  uninhabit- 
able, was  no  longer  inhabited.  It  was  a  dead  world,  such  as 
we  see  it  to-day." 

"And  you  say  that  the  same  fate  is  in  store  for  the 
earth  ?  " 

"  Most  probably." 

"But  when?" 

"  When  the  cooling  of  its  crust  shall  have  made  it  unin- 
habitable." 

"And  have  they  calculated  the  time  which  our  unfor- 
tunate sphere  will  take  to  cool?  " 

"  Certainly." 

"And  you  know  these  calculations?" 

"  Perfectly." 

"  But  speak,  then  my  clumsy  savant,"  exclaimed  Michel 
Ardan,  "  for  you  make  me  boil  with  impatience !  " 

"  Very  well,  my  good  Michel,"  replied  Barbicane  quietly, 
"we  know  what  diminution  of  temperature  the  earth  un- 
dergoes in  the  lapse  of  a  century.  And  according  to  cer- 
tain calculations,  this  mean  temperature  will,  after  a  period 
of  400,000  years,  be  brought  down  to  zero!  " 

"Four  hundred  thousand  years!"  exclaimed  Michel. 
"  Ah !  I  breathe  again.     Really  I  was  frightened  to  hear 


352  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

you;  I  imagined  that  we  had  not  more  than  50,000  years 
to  live." 

Barbicane  and  Nicholl  could  not  help  laughing  at  their 
companion's  uneasiness.  Then  Nicholl,  who  wished  to  end 
the  discussion,  put  the  second  question  which  had  just  been 
considered  again. 

"  Has  the  moon  been  inhabited?  "  he  asked. 

The  answer  was  unanimously  in  the  affirmative.  But 
during  this  discussion,  fruitful  in  somewhat  hazardous 
theories,  the  projectile  was  rapidly  leaving  the  moon;  the 
lineaments  faded  away  from  the  traveler's  eyes,  mountains 
were  confused  in  the  distance;  and  of  all  the  wonderful, 
strange,  and  fantastical  form  of  the  earth's  satellite,  there 
soon  remained  nothing  but  the  imperishable  remembrance. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

A  STRUGGLE  AGAINST  THE  IMPOSSIBLE 

For  a  long  time  Barbicane  and  his  companions  looked 
silently  and  sadly  upon  that  world  which  they  had  only 
seen  from  a  distance,  as  Moses  saw  the  land  of  Canaan, 
and  which  they  were  leaving  without  a  possibility  of  ever 
returning  to  it.  The  projectile's  position  with  regard  to 
the  moon  had  altered,  and  the  base  was  now  turned  to  the 
earth. 

This  change,  which  Barbicane  verified,  did  not  fail  to  sur- 
prise them.  If  the  projectile  was  to  gravitate  round  the 
satellite  in  an  elliptical  orbit,  why  was  not  its  heaviest  part 
turned  towards  it,  as  the  moon  turns  hers  to  the  earth? 
That  was  a  sufficient  point. 

In  watching  the  course  of  the  projectile  they  could  see 
that  on  leaving  the  moon  it  followed  a  course  analogous 
to  that  traced  in  approaching  her.  It  was  describing  a  very 
long  ellipse,  which  would  most  likely  extend  to  the  point 
of  equal  attraction,  where  the  influences  of  the  earth  and 
its  satellite  are  neutralized. 

Such  was  the  conclusion  which  Barbicane  very  justly 
drew  from  facts  already  observed,  a  conviction  which  his 
two  friends  shared  with  him. 

"  And  when  arrived  at  this  dead  point,  what  will  be- 
come of  us?"  asked  Michel  Ardan. 

V.  Ill  Verne 


AGAINST  THE  IMPOSSIBLE  353 

"  We  don't  know,"  replied  Barbicane. 

"  But  one  can  draw  some  hypothesis,  I  suppose?  " 

"  Two,"  answered  Barbicane ;  "  either  the  projectile's 
speed  will  be  insufficient,  and  it  will  remain  forever  im- 
movable on  this  line  of  double  attraction " 

"  I  prefer  the  other  hypothesis,  whatever  it  may  be,"  in- 
terrupted Michel. 

"  Or,"  continued  Barbicane,  "  its  speed  will  be  sufficient, 
and  it  will  continue  its  elliptical  course,  to  gravitate  for 
ever  around  the  orb  of  night." 

"A  revolution  not  at  all  consoling,"  said  Michel,  "to 
pass  to  the  state  of  humble  servants  to  a  moon  whom  we 
are  accustomed  to  look  upon  as  our  own  handmaid.  So 
that  is  the  fate  in  store  for  us  ?  " 

Neither  Barbicane  nor  Nicholl  answered. 

"You  do  not  answer,"  continued  Michel  impatiently. 

"  There  is  nothing  to  answer,"  said  Nicholl. 

"  Is  there  nothing  to  try  ?  " 

"  No,"  answered  Barbicane.  "  Do  you  pretend  to  fight 
against  the  impossible  ?  " 

"Why  not?  Do  one  Frenchman  and  two  Americans 
shrink  from  such  a  word  ?  " 

"  But  what  would  you  do  ?  " 

"  Subdue  this  motion  which  is  bearing  us  away." 

"Subdue  it?" 

"Yes,"  continued  Michel,  getting  animated,  "or  else 
alter  it,  and  employ  it  to  the  accomplishment  of  our  own 
ends." 

"And  how?" 

"That  is  your  affair.  If  artillerymen  are  not  masters 
of  their  projectile  they  are  not  artillerymen.  If  the  pro- 
jectile is  to  command  the  gunner,  we  had  better  ram  the 
gunner  into  the  gun.  My  faith !  fine  savants !  who  do  not 
know  what  is  to  become  of  us  after  inducing  me " 

"  Inducing  you !  "  cried  Barbicane  and  Nicholl.  "  In- 
ducing you !    What  do  you  mean  by  that?  " 

"  No  recrimination,"  said  Michel.  "  I  do  not  complain ; 
the  trip  has  pleased  me,  the  projectile  agrees  with  me ;  but 
let  us  do  all  that  is  humanly  possible  to  do  to  fall  some- 
where, even  if  only  on  the  moon." 

"  We  ask  no  better,  my  worthy  Michel,"  replied  Barbi- 
cane, "  but  means  fail  us." 


354  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

"  We  cannot  alter  the  motion  of  the  projectile?  " 

"  No." 

"  Nor  diminish  its  speed  ?  " 

"  No." 

"  Not  even  by  lightening  it,  as  they  lighten  an  over- 
loaded vessel  ?  " 

"  What  would  you  throw  out?  "  said  Nicholl.  "  We  have 
no  ballast  on  board;  and  indeed  it  seems  to  me  that  if 
lightened  it  would  go  much  quicker." 

"Slower." 

"  Quicker." 

"  Neither  slower  nor  quicker,"  said  Barbicane,  wishing 
to  make  his  two  friends  agree ;  "  for  we  float  in  space,  and 
must  no  longer  consider  specific  weight." 

"Very  well,"  cried  Michel  Ardan  in  a  decided  voice; 
"  then  there  remains  but  one  thing  to  do." 

"What  is  it?"  said  Nicholl. 

"Breakfast,"  answered  the  cool,  audacious  Frenchman, 
who  always  brought  up  this  solution  at  the  most  difficult 
juncture. 

In  any  case,  if  this  operation  had  no  influence  on  the  pro- 
jectile's course,  it  could  at  least  be  tried  without  incon- 
venience, and  even  with  success  from  a  stomachic  point  of 
view.     Certainly  Michel  had  none  but  good  ideas. 

They  breakfasted  then  at  two  in  the  morning;  the  hour 
mattered  little.  Michel  served  his  usual  repast,  crowned  by 
a  glorious  bottle  drawn  from  his  private  cellar.  If  ideas 
did  not  crowd  on  their  brains,  we  must  despair  of  the 
Chambertin  of  1853.  The  repast  finished,  observations  be- 
gan again.  Around  the  projectile,  at  an  invariable  dis- 
tance, were  the  objects  which  had  been  thrown  out.  Evi- 
dently, in  its  translatory  motion  round  the  moon,  it  had  not 
passed  through  any  atmosphere,  for  the  specific  weight  of 
these  different  objects  would  have  checked  their  relative 
speed. 

On  the  side  of  the  terrestrial  sphere  nothing  was  to  be 
seen.  The  earth  was  but  a  day  old,  having  been  new  the 
night  before  at  twelve ;  and  two  days  must  elapse  before  its 
crescent,  freed  from  the  solar  rays,  would  serve  as  a  clock 
to  the  Selenites,  as  in  its  rotatory  movement  each  of  its 
points  after  twenty-four  hours  repasses  the  same  lunar 
meridian. 


AGAINST  THE  IMPOSSIBLE  355 

On  the  moon's  side  the  sight  was  different ;  the  orb  shone 
in  all  her  splendor  amidst  innumerable  constellations,  whose 
purity  could  not  be  troubled  by  her  rays.  On  the  disc, 
the  plains  were  already  returning  to  the  dark  tint  which  is 
seen  from  the  earth.  The  other  part  of  the  nimbus  re- 
mained brilliant,  and  in  the  midst  of  this  general  brilliancy, 
Tycho  shone  prominently  like  a  sun. 

Barbicane  had  no  means  of  estimating  the  projectile's 
speed,  but  reasoning  showed  that  it  must  uniformly  de- 
crease, according  to  all  the  laws  of  mechanical  reasoning. 
Having  admitted  that  the  projectile  was  describing  an 
orbit  round  the  moon,  this  orbit  must  necessarily  be  ellipti- 
cal; science  proves  that  it  must  be  so.  No  motive  body 
circulating  round  an  attracting  body  fails  in  this  law.  Every 
orbit  described  in  space  is  elliptical.  And  why  should  the 
projectile  of  the  Gun  Club  escape  this  natural  arrangement? 
In  elliptical  orbits,  the  attracting  body  always  occupies  one 
of  the  foci;  so  that  at  one  moment  the  satellite  is  nearer, 
and  at  another  farther  from  the  orb  around  which  it  gravi- 
tates. When  the  earth  is  nearest  the  sun,  she  is  in  her 
perihelion ;  and  in  her  aphelion  at  the  farthest  point.  Speak- 
ing of  the  moon,  she  is  nearest  to  the  earth  in  her  perigee, 
and  farthest  from  it  in  her  apogee.  To  use  analogous  ex- 
pressions, with  which  the  astronomers'  language  is  en- 
riched, if  the  projectile  remains  as  a  satellite  of  the  moon, 
we  must  say  that  it  is  in  its  "  aposelene  "  at  its  farthest 
point,  and  in  its  "  periselene  "  at  its  nearest.  In  the  latter 
case^  the  projectile  would  attain  its  maximum  of  speed; 
and  in  the  former  its  minimum.  It  was  evidently  moving 
towards  its  aposelenitical  point;  and  Barbicane  had  reason 
to  think  that  its  speed  would  decrease  up  to  this  point,  and 
then  increase  by  degrees  as  it  neared  the  moon.  This  speed 
would  even  become  nil,  if  this  point  joined  that  of  equal 
attraction.  Barbicane  studied  the  consequences  of  these 
different  situations,  and  thinking  what  inference  he  could 
draw  from  them,  when  he  was  roughly  disturbed  by  a  cry 
from  Michel  Ardan. 

"  By  Jove !  "  he  exclaimed,  "  I  must  admit  we  are  down- 
right simpletons ! " 

"  I  do  not  say  we  are  not,"  replied  Barbicane ;  "  but 
why?" 

"  Because  we  have  a  very  simple  means  of  checking  this 


356  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

speed  which  is  bearing  us  from  the  moon,  and  we  do  not 
use  it !  " 

"  And  what  is  the  means  ?  " 

"  To  use  the  recoil  contained  in  our  rockets." 

**  Done !  "  said  Nicholl. 

"We  have  not  used  this  force  yet,"  said  Barbicane,  "it 
is  true,  but  we  will  do  so." 

"When?"  asked  Michel. 

"When  the  time  comes.  Observe,  my  friends,  thatin 
the  position  occupied  by  the  projectile,  an  oblique  position 
with  regard  to  the  lunar  disc,  our  rockets,  in  slightly  alter- 
ing its  direction,  might  turn  it  from  the  moon  instead  of 
drawing  it  nearer?  " 

"  Just  so,"  replied  Michel. 

"  Let  us  wait,  then.  By  some  inexplicable  influence,  the 
projectile  is  turning  its  base  towards  the  earth.  It  is  prob- 
able that  at  the  point  of  equal  attraction,  its  conical  cap  will 
be  directed  rigidly  towards  the  moon;  at  that  moment  we 
may  hope  that  its  speed  will  be  nil;  then  will  be  the  mo- 
ment to  act,  and  with  the  influence  of  our  rockets,  we 
may  perhaps  provoke  a  fall  directly  on  the  surface  of  the 
lunar  disc." 

"Bravo!"  said  Michel.  "What  we  did  not  do,  what 
we  could  not  do  on  our  first  passage  at  the  dead  point, 
because  the  projectile  was  then  endowed  with  too  great  a 
speed." 

"Very  well  reasoned,"  said  Nicholl. 

"Let  us  wait  patiently,"  continued  Barbicane.  "Put- 
ting every  chance  on  our  side,  and  after  having  so  much 
despaired,  I  may  say  I  think  that  we  shall  gain  our  end." 

This  conclusion  was  a  signal  for  Michel  Ardan's  hips 
and  hurrahs.  And  none  of  the  audacious  boobies  remem- 
bered the  question  that  they  themselves  had  solved  in  the 
negative.  No!  the  moon  is  not  inhabited;  no!  the  moon  is 
probably  not  habitable.  And  yet  they  were  going  to  try 
everything  to  reach  her. 

One  single  question  remained  to  be  solved.  At  what  pre- 
cise moment  the  projectile  would  reach  the  point  of  equal 
attraction,  on  which  the  travelers  must  play  their  last  card. 
In  order  to  calculate  this  to  within  a  few  seconds,  Barbi- 
cane had  only  to  refer  to  his  notes,  and  to  reckon  the  differ- 
ent heights  taken  on  the  lunar  parallels.     Thus  the  time 


AGAINST  THE  IMPOSSIBLE  357 

necessary  to  travel  over  the  distance  between  the  dead 
point  and  the  south  pole  would  be  equal  to  the  distance 
separating  the  north  pole  from  the  dead  point.  The  hours 
representing  the  time  traveled  over  were  carefully  noted, 
and  the  calculation  was  easy.  Barbicane  found  that  this 
point  would  be  reached  at  one  in  the  morning  on  the  night 
of  the  7th-8th  of  December.  So  that,  if  nothing  interfered 
with  its  course,  it  would  reach  the  given  point  in  twenty- 
two  hours. 

The  rockets  had  primarily  been  placed  to  check  the  fall  of 
the  projectile  upon  the  moon,  and  now  they  were  going 
to  employ  them  for  a  directly  contrary  purpose.  In  any 
case  they  were  ready,  and  they  had  only  to  wait  for  the 
moment  to  set  fire  to  them. 

"  Since  there  is  nothing  else  to  be  done,"  said  Nicholl, 
"  I  make  a  proposition." 

"What  is  it?"  asked  Barbicane. 

"  I  propose  to  go  to  sleep." 

"What  a  motion!"  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan. 

"  It  is  forty  hours  since  we  closed  our  eyes,"  said  Nicholl. 
"Some  hours  of  sleep  will  restore  our  strength." 

"Never,"  interrupted  Michel. 

"Well,"  continued  Nicholl,  "everyone  to  his  taste;  I 
shall  go  to  sleep."  And  stretching  himself  on  the  divan, 
he  soon  snored  like  a  forty-eight  pounder. 

"  That  Nicholl  has  a  good  deal  of  sense,"  said  Barbicane, 
"presently  I  shall  follow  his  example."  And  for  some 
moments  after  his  continued  bass  supported  the  captain's 
baritone. 

^  "  Certainly,"  said  Michel  Ardan,  finding  himself  alone, 
"these  practical  people  have  sometimes  most  opportune 
ideas." 

And  with  his  long  legs  stretched  out,  and  his  great  arms 
folded  under  his  head,  Michel  slept  in  his  turn. 

But  this  sleep  could  be  neither  peaceful  nor  lasting,  the 
minds  of  these  three  men  were  too  much  occupied,  and 
some  hours  after,  about  seven  in  the  morning,  all  three 
were  on  foot  at  the  same  instant. 

The  projectile  was  still  leaving  the  moon,  and  turning  its 
conical  part  more  and  more  towards  her. 

An  explicable  phenomenon,  but  one  which  happily  served 
Barbicane's  end. 


358  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

Seventeen  hours  more,  and  the  moment  for  action  would 
have  arrived. 

The  day  seemed  long.  However  bold  the  travelers  might 
be,  they  were  greatly  impressed  by  the  approach  of  that 
moment  which  would  decide  all — either  precipitate  their 
fall  onto  the  moon,  or  forever  chain  them  in  an  immutable 
orbit.  They  counted  the  hours  as  they  passed  too  slow  for 
their  wish ;  Barbicane  and  Nicholl  were  obstinately  plunged 
in  their  calculations,  Michel  going  and  coming  between  the 
narrow  walls,  and  watching  that  impassive  moon  with  a 
longing  eye. 

At  times  recollections  of  the  earth  crossed  their  minds. 
They  saw  once  more  their  friends  of  the  Gun  Club,  and 
the  dearest  of  all,  J.  T.  Maston.  At  that  moment  the 
honorable  secretary  must  be  filling  his  post  on  the  Rocky 
Mountains.  If  he  could  see  the  projectile  through  the 
glass  of  his  gigantic  telescope,  what  would  he  think?  After 
seeing  it  disappear  behind  the  moon's  south  pole,  he  would 
see  them  reappear  by  the  north  pole.  They  must  there- 
fore be  a  satellite  of  a  satellite!  Had  J.  T.  Maston  given 
this  unexpected  news  to  the  world?  Was  this  the  de- 
nouement of  this  great  enterprise? 

But  the  day  passed  without  incident.  The  terrestrial 
midnight  arrived.  The  8th  of  December  was  beginning. 
One  hour  more,  and  the  point  of  equal  attraction  would  be 
reached.  What  speed  would  then  animate  the  projectile? 
They  could  not  estimate  it.  But  no  error  could  vitiate 
Barbicane's  calculations.  At  one  in  the  morning,  this  speed 
ought  to  be  and  would  be  nil. 

Besides,  another  phenomenon  would  mark  the  projec- 
tile's stopping-point  on  the  neutral  line.  At  that  spot  the 
two  attractions,  lunar  and  terrestrial,  would  be  annulled. 
Objects  would  "  weigh "  no  more.  This  singular  fact, 
which  had  surprised  Barbicane  and  his  companions  so 
much  in  going,  would  be  repeated  on  their  return  under 
the  very  same  conditions.  At  this  precise  moment  they 
must  act. 

Already  the  projectile's  conical  top  was  sensibly  turned 
towards  the  lunar  disc,  presented  in  such  a  way  as  to  utilize 
the  whole  of  the  recoil  produced  by  the  pressure  of  the 
rocket  apparatus.  The  chances  were  in  favor  of  the  travel- 
ers.    If  its  speed  was  utterly  annulled  on  this  dead  point, 


AGAINST  THE  IMPOSSIBLE  359 

a  decided  movement  towards  the  moon  would  suffice,  how- 
ever slight,  to  determine  its  fall. 

"  Five  minutes  to  one,"  said  Nicholl. 

"  All  is  ready,"  replied  Michel  Ardan,  directing  a  lighted 
match  to  the  flame  of  gas. 

"  Wait !  "  said  Barbicane,  holding  his  chronometer  in  his 
hand. 

At  that  moment  weight  had  no  effect.  The  travelers 
felt  in  themselves  the  entire  disappearance  of  it.  They 
were  very  near  the  neutral  point,  if  they  did  not  touch  it. 

"  One  o'clock,"  said  Barbicane. 

Michel  Ardan  applied  the  lighted  match  to  a  train  in 
communication  with  the  rockets.  No  detonation  was  heard 
in  the  inside,  for  there  was  no  air.  But,  through  the  scut- 
tles, Barbicane  saw  a  prolonged  smoke,  the  flames  of  which 
were  immediately  extinguished. 

The  projectile  sustained  a  certain  shock,  which  was  sen- 
sibly felt  in  the  interior. 

The  three  friends  looked  and  listened  without  speaking, 
and  scarcely  breathing.  One  might  have  heard  the  beating 
of  their  hearts  amidst  this  perfect  silence. 

"Are  we  falling?  "  asked  Michel  Ardan,  at  length. 

"No,"  said  Nicholl,  "  since  the  bottom  of  the  projectile 
is  not  turning  to  the  lunar  disc ! " 

At  this  moment,  Barbicane,  quitting  the  scuttle,  turned 
to  his  two  companions.  He  was  frightfully  pale,  his  fore- 
head wrinkled,  and  his  lips  contracted. 

"We  are  falling!"  said  he. 

"  Ah !  "  cried  Michel  Ardan,  "  onto  the  moon?  " 

"  Onto  the  earth !  " 

"The  devil!"  exclaimed  Michel  Ardan,  adding  philo- 
sophically, "well,  when  we  came  into  this  projectile  we 
were  very  doubtful  as  to  the  ease  with  which  we  should  get 
out  of  it!" 

And  now  this  fearful  fall  had  begun.  The  speed  re- 
tained had  borne  the  projectile  beyond  the  dead  point.  The 
explosion  of  the  rockets  could  not  divert  its  course.  This 
speed  in  going  had  carried  it  over  the  neutral  line,  and  in 
returning  had  done  the  same  thing.  The  laws  of  physics 
condemned  it  to  pass  through  every  point  which  it  had  al- 
ready gone  through.  It  was  a  terrible  fall,  from  a  height 
of  160,000  miles,  and  no  springs  to  break  it.    According  to 


360  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

the  laws  of  gunnery,  the  projectile  must  strike  the  earth 
with  a  speed  equal  to  that  with  which  ir  left  the  mouth  of 
the  Columbiad,  a  speed  of  16,000  yards  in  the  last  second. 

But  to  give  some  figures  of  comparison,  it  has  been  reck- 
oned that  an  object  thrown  from  the  top  of  the  tower  of 
Notre  Dame,  the  height  of  which  is  only  200  feet,  will 
arrive  on  the  pavement  at  a  speed  of  240  miles  per  hour. 
Here  the  projectile  must  strike  the  earth  with  a  speed  of 
1 15,200  miles  per  hour. 

"  We  are  lost !  "  said  Michel  coolly. 

"  Very  well !  if  we  die,"  answered  Barbicane,  with  a  sort 
of  religious  enthusiasm,  "  the  result  of  our  travels  will  be 
magnificently  spread.  It  is  His  own  secret  that  God  will 
tell  us !  In  the  other  life,  the  soul  will  want  to  know  noth- 
ing, either  of  machines  or  engines!  It  will  be  identified 
with  eternal  wisdom !  " 

"  In  fact,"  interrupted  Michel  Ardan,  "the  whole  of  the 
other  world  may  weil  console  us  for  the  loss  of  that  inferior 
orb  called  the  moon !  " 

Barbicane  crossed  his  arms  on  his  breast,  with  a  motion 
of  sublime  resignation,  saying  at  the  same  time: 

"  The  will  of  Heaven  be  done !  " 


CHAPTER  XX 

THE  SOUNDINGS  OF  THE  "  SUSQUEHANNA." 

"  Well,  lieutenant,  and  our  soundings  ?  " 

"I  think,  sir,  that  the  operation  is  nearing  its  comple- 
tion," replied  Lieutenant  Bronsfield.  "  But  who  would 
have  thought  of  finding  such  a  depth  so  near  in  shore,  and 
only  200  miles  from  the  American  coast  ?  " 

"  Certainly,  Bronsfield,  there  is  a  great  depression,"  said 
Captain  Blomsberry.  "In  this  spot  there  is  a  submarine 
valley  worn  by  Humboldt's  current,  which  skirts  the  coast 
of  America  as  far  as  the  Straits  of  Magellan." 

"These  great  depths,"  continued  the  lieutenant,  "are 
not  favorable  for  laying  telegraph  cables.  A  level  bottom, 
like  that  supporting  the  American  cable  between  Valentia 
and  Newfoundland,  is  much  better." 

"  I  agree  with  you,  Bronsfield.  With  your  permission, 
lieutenant,  where  are  we  now?" 


SOUNDINGS  OF  THE  "SUSQUEHANNA"  361 

"  Sir,  at  this  moment  we  have  3,508  fathoms  of  line  out, 
and  the  ball  which  draws  the  sounding  lead  has  not  yet 
touched  the  bottom;  for  if  so,  it  would  have  come  up  of 
itself." 

"Brook's  apparatus  is  very  ingenious,"  said  Captain 
Blomsberry ;  "  it  gives  us  very  exact  soundings." 

"  Touch!  "  cried  at  this  moment  one  of  the  men  at  the 
fore-wheel,  who  was  superintending  the  operation. 

The  captain  and  the  lieutenant  mounted  the  quarter-deck. 

"  What  depth  have  we  ?  "  asked  the  captain. 

"  Three  thousand  six  hundred  and  twenty-seven  fa- 
thoms," replied  the  lieutenant,  entering  it  in  his  note-book. 

"  Well,  Bronsfield,"  said  the  captain,  "  I  will  take  down 
the  result.  Now  haul  in  the  sounding  line.  It  will  be  the 
work  of  some  hours.  In  that  time  the  engineer  can  light 
the  furnaces,  and  we  shall  be  ready  to  start  as  soon  as  you 
have  finished.  It  is  ten  o'clock,  and  with  your  permission, 
lieutenant,  I  will  turn  in." 

"  Do  so,  sir;  do  so!  "  replied  the  lieutenant  obligingly. 

The  captain  of  the  Susquehanna,  as  brave  a  man  as  need 
be,  and  the  humble  servant  of  his  officers,  returned  to  his 
cabin,  took  a  brandy-grog,  which  earned  for  the  steward 
no  end  of  praise,  and  turned  in,  not  without  having  compli- 
mented his  servant  upon  his  making  beds,  and  slept  a 
peaceful  sleep. 

It  was  ten  at  night.  The  eleventh  day  of  the  month  of 
December  was  drawing  to  a  close  in  a  magnificent  night. 

The  Susquehanna,  a  corvette  of  500  horse-power  of  the 
United  States  navy,  was  occupied  in  taking  soundings  in 
the  Pacific  Ocean  about  200  miles  oflf  the  American  coast, 
following  that  long  peninsula  which  stretches  down  the 
coast  of  Mexico. 

The  wind  had  dropped  by  degrees.  There  was  no  dis- 
turbance in  the  air.  Their  pennant  hung  motionless  from 
the  maintop-gallant-mast  truck. 

Captain  Jonathan  Blomsberry  (cousin-german  of  Colonel 
Blomsberry,  one  of  the  most  ardent  supporters  of  the  Gun 
Club,  who  had  married  an  aunt  of  the  captain  and  daughter 
of  an  honorable  Kentucky  merchant), — Captain  Bloms- 
berry could  not  have  wished  for  finer  weather  in  which  to 
bring  to  a  close  his  delicate  operations  of  sounding.  His 
corvette  had  not  even  felt  the  great  tempest,  which  by 


362  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

sweeping  away  the  groups  of  clouds  on  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains, had  allowed  them  to  observe  the  course  of  the  famous 
projectile. 

Everything  went  well,  and  with  all  the  fervor  of  a  Pres- 
byterian, he  did  not  forget  to  thank  Heaven  for  it.  The 
series  of  soundings  taken  by  the  Susquehanna,  had  for  its 
aim  the  finding  of  a  favorable  spot  for  the  laying  of  a  sub- 
marine cable  to  connect  the  Hawaian  Islands  with  the 
coast  of  America. 

It  was  a  great  undertaking,  due  to  the  instigation  of  a 
powerful  company.  Its  managing  director,  the  intelligent 
Cyrus  Field,  proposed  even  covering  all  the  islands  of 
Oceanica  with  a  vast  electrical  network,  an  immense  enter- 
prise, and  one  worthy  of  American  genius. 

To  the  corvette  Susquehanna  had  been  confided  the  first 
operations  of  sounding.  It  was  on  the  night  of  the  Iith- 
12th  December,  she  was  in  exactly  2j°  7'  north  lat,  and 
41  °  37'  west  long.,  on  the  meridian  of  Washington. 

^  The  moon,  then,  in  her  last  quarter,  was  beginning  to 
rise  above  the  horizon. 

After  the  departure  of  Captain  Blomsberry,  the  lieuten- 
ant and  some  officers  were  standing  together  on  the  poop. 
On  the  appearance  of  the  moon,  their  thoughts  turned  to 
that  orb  which  the  eyes  of  the  whole  hemisphere  were  con- 
templating. The  best  naval  glasses  could  not  have  dis- 
covered the  projectile  wandering  around  its  hemisphere,  and 
yet  all  were  pointing  towards  that  brilliant  disc  which 
millions  of  eyes  were  looking  at  at  the  same  moment. 

"  They  have  been  gone  ten  days,"  said  Lieutenant  Brons- 
field  at  last.    "  What  has  become  of  them  ?  " 

"  They  have  arrived,  lieutenant,"  exclaimed  a  young 
midshipman,  "and  they  are  doing  what  all  travelers  do 
when  they  arrive  in  a  new  country,  taking  a  walk !  " 

"  Oh !  I  am  sure  of  that,  if  you  tell  me  so,  my  young 
'friends,"  said  Lieutenant  Bronsfield,  smiling. 

"  But,"  continued  another  officer,  "  their  arrival  cannot 
be  doubted.  The  projectile  was  to  reach  the  moon  when 
full  on  the  5th  at  midnight.  We  are  now  at  the  nth  of 
December,  which  makes  six  days.  And  in  six  times  twenty- 
four  hours,  without  darkness,  one  would  have  time  to  settle 
comfortably.  I  fancy  I  see  my  brave  countrymen  en- 
camped at  the  bottom  of  some  valley,  on  the  borders  of  a 


SOUNDINGS  OF  THE  "  SUSQUEHANNA  "     363 

Selenite  stream,  near  a  projectile  half  buried  by  its  fall 
amidst  volcanic  rubbish,  Captain  Nicholl  beginning  his 
leveling  operations,  President  Barbicane  writing  out  his 
notes,  and  Michel  Ardan  embalming  the  lunar  solitudes 
with  the  perfume  of  his " 

"  Yes !  it  must  be  so,  it  is  so !  "  exclaimed  the  young  mid- 
shipman, worked  up  to  a  pitch  of  enthusiasm  by  this  ideal 
description  of  his  superior  officer. 

"  I  should  like  to  believe  it,"  replied  the  lieutenant,  who 
was  quite  unmoved.  "Unfortunately  direct  news  from 
the  lunar  world  is  still  wanting." 

"Beg  pardon,  lieutenant,"  said  the  midshipman,  "but 
can  not  President  Barbicane  write?" 

A  burst  of  laughter  greeted  this  answer. 

"  No  letters !  "  continued  the  young  man  quickly.  "  The 
postal  administration  has  something  to  see  to  there." 

"  Might  it  not  be  the  telegraphic  service  that  is  at  fault?  " 
asked  one  of  the  officers  ironically. 

"  Not  necessarily,"  replied  the  midshipman,  not  at  all 
confused.  "  But  it  is  very  easy  to  set  up  a  graphic  com- 
munication with  the  earth." 

"And  how?" 

"  By  means  of  the  telescope  at  Long's  Peak.  You  know 
it  brings  the  moon  to  within  four  miles  of  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  and  that  it  shows  objects  on  its  surface  of  only 
nine  feet  in  diameter.  Very  well ;  let  our  industrious  friends 
construct  a  gigantic  alphabet;  let  them  write  words  three 
fathoms  long,  and  sentences  three  miles  long,  and  then  they 
can  send  us  news  of  themselves?  " 

The  young  midshipman,  who  had  a  certain  amount  of 
imagination,  was  loudly  applauded;  Lieutenant  Bronsfield 
allowing  that  the  idea  was  possible,  but  observing  that  if 
by  these  means  they  could  receive  news  from  the  lunar 
world  they  could  not  send  any  from  the  terrestrial,  unless 
the  Selenites  had  instruments  fit  for  taking  distant  observa- 
tions at  their  disposal. 

"  Evidently,"  said  one  of  the  officers;  "  but  what  has  be- 
come of  the  travelers?  what  they  have  done,  what  they 
have  seen,  that  above  all  must  interest  us.  Besides,  if  the 
experiment  has  succeeded  (which  I  do  not  doubt),  they  will 
try  it  again.  The  Columbiad  is  still  sunk  in  the  soil  of 
Florida.     It  is  now  only  a  question  of  powder  and  shot; 


364  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

and  every  time  the  moon  is  at  her  zenith,  a  cargo  of  visitors 
may  be  sent  to  her." 

"  It  is  clear,"  replied  Lieutenant  Bronsfield,  "  that  J.  T. 
Maston  will  one  day  join  his  friends." 

"  If  he  will  have  me,"  cried  the  midshipman,  "  I  am 
ready ! " 

'  Oh !  volunteers  will  not  be  wanting,"  answered  Brons- 
field; "  and  if  it  were  allowed,  half  of  the  earth's  inhabitants 
would  emigrate  to  the  moon !  " 

This  conversation  between  the  officers  of  the  Susque- 
hanna was  kept  up  until  nearly  one  in  the  morning.  We 
can  not  say  what  blundering  systems  were  broached,  what 
inconsistent  theories  advanced  by  these  bold  spirits.  Since 
Barbicane's  attempt,  nothing  seemed  impossible  to  the 
Americans.  They  had  already  designed  an  expedition,  not 
only  of  savants,  but  of  a  whole  colony  towards  the  Selenite 
borders,  and  a  complete  army,  consisting  of  infantry,  ar- 
tillery, and  cavalry,  to  conquer  the  lunar  world. 

At  one  in  the  morning,  the  hauling  in  of  the  sounding- 
line  was  not  yet  completed;  1,670  fathoms  were  still  out, 
which  would  entail  some  hours'  work.  According  to  the 
commander's  orders,  the  fires  had  been  lighted,  and  steam 
was  being  got  up.  The  Susquehanna  could  have  started 
that  very  instant. 

At  that  moment  (it  was  seventeen  minutes  past  one  in 
the  morning)  Lieutenant  Bronsfield  was  preparing  to  leave 
the  watch  and  return  to  his  cabin,  when  his  attention  was 
attracted  by  a  distant  hissing  noise.  His  comrades  and 
himself  first  thought  that  this  hissing  was  caused  by  the 
letting  off  of  steam;  but  lifting  their  heads,  they  found  that 
the  noise  was  produced  in  the  highest  regions  of  the  air. 
They  had  not  time  to  question  each  other  before  the  hissing 
became  frightfully  intense,  and  suddenly  there  appeared  to 
their  dazzled  eyes  an  enormous  meteor,  ignited  by  the  rapid- 
ity of  its  course  and  its  friction  through  the  atmospheric 
strata. 

This  fiery  mass  grew  larger  to  their  eyes,  and  fell,  with 
the  noise  of  thunder,  upon  the  bowsprit,  which  it  smashed 
close  to  the  stern,  and  buried  itself  in  the  waves  with  a 
deafening  roar! 

A  few  feet  nearer,  and  the  Susquehanna  would  have 
foundered  with  all  on  board ! 


SOUNDINGS  OF  THE  "  SUSQUEHANNA  "     365 

At  this  instant  Captain  Blomsberry  appeared,  half 
dressed,  and  rushing  onto  the  forcastle-deck,  whither^  all 
the  officers  had  hurried,  exclaimed,  "  With  your  permission, 
gentlemen,  what  has  happened  ?  " 

And  the  young  midshipman,  making  himself  as  it  were 
the  echo  of  the  body,  cried,  "  Commander,  it  is  '  they  '  come 
back  again ! " 


CHAPTER    XXI 

J.  T.   MASTON  RECALLED 

"  It  is  *  they  '  come  back  again !  "  the  young  midshipman 
had  said;  and  everyone  had  understood  him.  No  one 
doubted  but  that  that  meteor  was  the  projectile  of  the  Gun 
Club.  As  to  the  travelers  which  it  enclosed,  opinions  were 
divided  regarding  their  fate. 

"  They  are  dead !  "  said  one. 

"  They  are  alive !  "  said  another :  "  the  crater  is  deep,  and 
the  shock  was  deadened." 

"  But  they  must  have  wanted  air,"  continued  a  third 
speaker;  "  they  must  have  died  of  suffocation." 

"Burnt!"  excitedly  cried  a  fourth;  "the  projectile  was 
nothing  but  an  incandescent  mass  as  it  crossed  the  at- 
mosphere." 

"  What  does  it  matter !  "  they  exclaimed  unanimously ; 
"  living  or  dead,  we  must  pull  them  out !  " 

But  Captain  Blomsberry  had  assembled  his  officers,  and 
"  with  their  permission,"  was  holding  a  council.  They  must 
decide  upon  something  to  be  done  immediately.  The  more 
hasty  ones  were  for  fishing  up  the  projectile.  A  difficult 
operation,  though  not  an  impossible  one.  But  the  corvette 
had  no  proper  machinery,  which  must  be  both  fixed  and 
powerful;  so  it  was  resolved  that  they  should  put  in  at  the 
nearest  port,  and  give  information  to  the  Gun  Club  of  the 
projectile's  fall. 

This  determination  was  unanimous.  The  choice  of  the 
port  had  to  be  discussed.  The  neighboring  coast  had  no 
anchorage  on  270  lat.  Higher  up,  above  the  peninsula  of 
Monterey,  stands  the  important  town  from  which  it  takes 
its  name;  but,  seated  on  the  borders  of  a  perfect  desert,  it 
was  not  connected  with  the  interior  by  a  network  of  tele- 


366  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

graphic  wires,  and  electricity  alone  could  spread  these  im- 
portant news  fast  enough. 

Some  degrees  above  opened  the  bay  of  San  Francisco. 

Through  the  capital  of  the  gold  country,  communication 
would  be  easy  with  the  heart  of  the  Union.  And  in  less 
than  two  days  the  Susquehanna,  by  putting  on  high  pres- 
sure, could  arrive  in  that  port.  She  must  therefore  start  at 
once. 

The  fires  were  made  up;  they  could  set  off  immediately. 
Two  thousand  fathoms  of  line  were  still  out,  which  Captain 
Blomsberry,  not  wishing  to  lose  precious  time  in  hauling  in, 
resolved  to  cut. 

"  We  will  fasten  the  end  of  the  rope  to  a  buoy,"  said  he; 
"  and  that  buoy  will  show  us  the  exact  spot  where  the  pro- 
jectile fell." 

"  Besides,"  replied  Lieutenant  Bronsfield,  "  we  have  our 
situation  exact — 270  y'  north  lat,  and  41  °  37'  west  long." 

"  Well,  Mr.  Bronsfield,"  replied  the  captain,  "now,  with 
your  permission,  we  will  have  the  line  cut." 

A  strong  buoy,  strengthened  by  a  couple  of  spars,  was 
thrown  into  the  ocean.  The  end  of  the  rope  was  carefully 
lashed  to  it;  and,  left  solely  to  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  bil- 
lows, the  buoy  would  not  sensibly  deviate  from  the  spot. 

At  this  moment  the  engineer  sent  to  inform  the  captain 
that  steam  was  up  and  they  could  start,  for  which  agree- 
able communication  the  captain  thanked  him.  The  course 
was  then  given  north-north-east,  and  the  corvette,  wearing, 
steered  at  full  steam  direct  for  San  Francisco.  It  was  three 
in  the  morning. 

Four  hundred  and  fifty  miles  to  cross ;  it  was  nothing  for 
a  good  vessel  like  the  Susquehanna.  In  thirty-six  hours 
she  had  covered  that  distance;  and  on  the  14th  of  December, 
at  twenty-seven  minutes  past  one  at  night,  she  entered  the 
bay  of  San  Francisco. 

At  the  sight  of  a  ship  of  the  national  navy  arriving  at  full 
speed,  with  her  bowsprit  broken,  public  curiosity  was  greatly 
roused.  A  dense  crowd  soon  assembled  on  the  quay,  wait- 
ing for  them  to  disembark. 

After  casting  anchor,  Captain  Blomsberry  and  Lieutenant 
Bronsfield  entered  an  eight-oared  cutter,  which  soon  brought 
them  to  land. 

They  jumped  onto  the  quay. 


J.  T.  MASTON  RECALLED  367 

"  The  telegraph?  "  they  asked,  without  answering  one  of 
the  thousand  questions  addressed  to  them. 

The  officer  of  the  port  conducted  them  to  the  telegraph- 
office  through  a  concourse  of  spectators.  Blomsberry  and 
Bronsfield  entered,  while  the  crowd,  crushed  each  other  at 
the  door. 

Some  minutes  later  a  fourfold  telegram  was  sent  out — 
the  first  to  the  Naval  Secretary  at  Washington;  the  second 
to  the  Vice-President  of  the  Gun  Club,  Baltimore;  the  third 
to  the  Hon.  J.  T.  Maston,  Long's  Peak,  Rocky  Mountains ; 
the  fourth  to  the  Sub-Director  of  the  Cambridge  Observa- 
tory, Massachusetts. 

It  was  worded  as  follows : 

"  In  200  7'  north  lat.,  and  41  °  37'  west  long.,  on  the  12th 
of  December,  at  17  minutes  past  1  in  the  morning,  the  pro- 
jectile of  the  Columbiad  fell  into  the  Pacific.  Send  instruc- 
tions. 

"  Blomsberry,  Commander  Susquehanna." 

Five  minutes  afterwards  the  whole  town  of  San  Francisco 
learned  the  news.  Before  six  in  the  evening  the  different 
States  of  the  Union  had  heard  the  great  catastrophe;  and 
after  midnight,  by  the  cable,  the  whole  of  Europe  knew  the 
result  of  the  great  American  experiment. 

We  will  not  attempt  to  picture  the  effect  produced  on 
the  entire  world  by  that  unexpected  denouement. 

On  receipt  of  the  telegram  the  Naval  Secretary  tele- 
graphed to  the  Susquehanna  to  wait  in  the  bay  of  San  Fran- 
cisco without  extinguishing  her  fires.  Day  and  night  she 
must  be  ready  to  put  to  sea. 

The  Cambridge  Observatory  called  a  special  meeting ;  and 
with  that  composure  which  distinguishes  learned  bodies  in 
general,  peacefully  discussed  the  scientific  bearings  of  the 
question.  At  the  Gun  Club  there  was  an  explosion.  All 
the  gunners  were  assembled.  Vice-President  the  Hon.  Wil- 
come  was  in  the  act  of  reading  the  premature  dispatch,  in 
which  J.  T.  Maston  and  Belfast  announced  that  the  pro- 
jectile had  just  been  seen  in  the  gigantic  reflector  of  Long's 
Peak,  and  also  that  it  was  held  by  lunar  attraction,  and  was 
playing  the  part  of  under  satellite  to  the  lunar  world. 

We  know  the  truth  on  that  point. 

But  on   the   arrival  of   Blomsberry's    dispatch,    so    de- 


368  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

cidedly  contradicting  J.  T.  Maston's  telegram,  two  parties 
were  formed  in  the  bosom  of  the  Gun  Club.  On  one  side 
were  those  who  admitted  the  fall  of  the  projectile,  and  con- 
sequently the  return  of  the  travelers;  on  the  other,  those 
who  believed  in  the  observations  of  Long's  Peak,  concluded 
that  the  commander  of  the  Susquehanna  had  made  a  mis- 
take. To  the  latter  the  pretended  projectile  was  nothing  but 
a  meteor!  nothing  but  a  meteor,  a  shooting  globe,  which  in 
its  fall  had  smashed  the  bows  of  the  corvette.  It  was  diffi- 
cult to  answer  this  argument,  for  the  speed  with  which  it 
was  animated  must  have  made  observation  very  difficult. 
The  commander  of  the  Susquehanna  and  her  officers  might 
have  made  a  mistake  in  all  good  faith ;  one  argument,  how- 
ever, was  in  their  favor,  namely,  that  if  the  projectile  had 
fallen  on  the  earth,  its  place  of  meeting  with  the  terrestrial 
globe  could  only  take  place  on  this  270  north  lat.,  and  (tak- 
ing into  consideration  the  time  that  had  elapsed,  and  the 
rotary  motion  of  the  earth)  between  the  forty-first  and  the 
forty-second  degree  of  west  longitude.  In  any  case,  it 
was  decided  in  the  Gun  Club  that  Blomsberry  brothers, 
Bilsby,  and  Major  Elphinstone  should  go  straight  to  San 
Francisco,  and  consult  as  to  the  means  of  raising  the  pro- 
jectile from  the  depths  of  the  ocean. 

These  devoted  men  set  off  at  once;  and  the  railroad, 
which  will  soon  cross  the  whole  of  central  America,  took 
them  as  far  as  St.  Louis,  where  the  swift  mail-coaches 
awaited  them.  Almost  at  the  same  moment  in  which  the 
Secretary  of  Marine,  the  Vice-President  of  the  Gun  Club, 
and  the  Sub-Director  of  the  Observatory  received  the  dis- 
patch from  San  Francisco,  the  Honorable  J.  T.  Maston  was 
undergoing  the  greatest  excitement  he  had  ever  experienced 
in  his  life,  an  excitement  which  even  the  bursting  of  his  pet 
gun,  which  had  more  than  once  nearly  cost  him  his  life,  had 
not  caused  him.  We  may  remember  that  the  Secretary 
of  the  Gun  Club  had  started  soon  after  the  projectile  (and 
almost  as  quickly)  for  the  station  in  Long's  Peak,  in  the 
Rocky  Mountains,  J.  Belfast,  Director  of  the  Cambridge 
Observatory,  accompanying  him.  Arrived  there,  the  two 
friends  had  installed  themselves  at  once  never  quitting  the 
summit  of  their  enormous  telescope.  We  know  that  this 
gigantic  instrument  had  been  set  up  according  to  the  reflect- 
ing system,  called  by  the  English  "  front  view."     This  ar- 


J.  T.  MASTON  RECALLED  369 

rangement  subjected  all  objects  to  but  one  reflection,  making 
the  view  consequently  much  clearer;  the  result  was  that 
when  they  were  taking  observations,  J.  T.  Maston  and  Bel- 
fast were  placed  in  the  upper  part  of  the  instrument  and  not 
in  the  lower,  which  they  reached  by  a  circular  staircase,  a 
master-piece  of  lightness,  while  below  them  opened  a  metal 
well,  terminated  by  the  metallic  mirror,  which  measured  280 
feet  in  depth. 

It  was  on  a  narrow  platform  placed  above  the  telescope 
that  the  two  sevants  passed  their  existence,  execrating  the 
day  which  hid  the  moon  from  their  eyes,  and  the  clouds 
which  obstinately  veiled  her  during  the  night. 

What,  then,  was  their  delight,  when,  after  some  days  of 
waiting,  on  the  night  of  the  5th  of  December,  they  saw  the 
vehicle  which  was  bearing  their  friends  into  space !  To  this 
'delight  succeeded  a  great  deception,  when,  trusting  to  a 
cursory  observation,  they  launched  their  first  telegram  to 
the  world,  erroneously  affirming  that  the  projectile  had  be- 
come a  satellite  of  the  moon,  gravitating  in  an  immutable 
orbit. 

From  that  moment  it  had  never  shown  itself  to  their 
eyes — a  disappearance  all  the  more  easily  explained,  as  it 
was  then  passing  behind  the  moon's  invisible  disc ;  but  when 
it  was  time  for  it  to  reappear  on  the  visible  disc,  one  may 
imagine  the  impatience  of  the  fuming  J.  T.  Maston  and  his 
not  less  impatient  companion.  Each  minute  of  the  night 
they  thought  they  saw  the  projectile  once  more,  and  they  did 
not  see  it.  Hence  constant  discussions  and  violent  disputes 
between  them,  Belfast  affirming  that  the  projectile  could  not 
be  seen,  J.  T.  Maston  maintaining  that  "  it  had  put  his  eyes 
out." 

"  It  is  the  projectile !  "  repeated  J.  T.  Maston. 

"No,"  answered  Belfast;  "it  is  an  avalanche  detached 
from  a  lunar  mountain." 

"  Well,  we  shall  see  it  to-morrow." 

"No,  we  shall  not  see  it  any  more.  It  is  carried  into 
space." 

"Yes!" 

"No!" 

And  at  these  moments,  when  contradictions  rained  like 
hail,  the  well-known  irritability  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Gun 
Club  constituted  a  permanent  danger  for  the  Hon.  Belfast. 


370  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

The  existence  of  these  two  together  would  soon  have  be- 
come impossible;  but  an  unforeseen  event  cut  short  their 
everlasting  discussions. 

During  the  night,  from  the  14th  to  the  15th  of  December, 
the  two  irreconcilable  friends  were  busy  observing  the  lunar 
disc,  J.  T.  Maston  abusing  the  learned  Belfast  as  usual,  who 
was  by  his  side;  the  Secretary  of  the  Gun  Club  maintaining 
for  the  thousandth  time  that  he  had  just  seen  the  projectile, 
and  adding  that  he  could  see  Michel  Ardan's  face  looking 
through  one  of  the  scuttles,  at  the  same  time  enforcing  his 
argument  by  a  series  of  gestures  which  his  formidable  hook 
rendered  very  unpleasant. 

At  this  moment  Belfast's  servant  appeared  on  the  plat- 
form (it  was  ten  at  night)  and  gave  him  a  dispatch.  It  was 
the  commander  of  the  Susquehanna's  telegram. 

Belfast  tore  the  envelope  and  read,  and  uttered  a  cry. 

"What!"  said  J.  T.  Maston. 

"The  projectile!" 

".Well!" 
,    "Has  fallen  to  the  earth!" 

Another  cry,  this  time  a  perfect  howl  answered  him.  He 
turned  towards  J.  T.  Maston.  The  unfortunate  man,  im- 
prudently leaning  over  the  metal  tube,  had  disappeared  in 
the  immense  telescope.  A  fall  of  280  feet!  Belfast,  dis- 
mayed, rushed  to  the  orifice  of  the  reflector. 

He  breathed.  J.  T.  Maston,  caught  by  his  metal  hook, 
was  holding  on  by  one  of  the  rings  which  bound  the  tele- 
scope together,  uttering  fearful  cries. 

Belfast  called.  Help  was  brought,  tackle  was  let  down, 
and  they  hoisted  up,  not  without  some  trouble,  the  impru- 
dent Secretary  of  the  Gun  Club. 

He  reappeared  at  the  upper  orifice  without  hurt. 

"  Ah!  "  said  he,  "  if  I  had  broken  the  mirror?  " 

"  You  would  have  paid  for  it,"  replied  Belfast  in  a 
severe  tone. 

"And  that  cursed  projectile  has  fallen?"  asked  J.  T. 
Maston. 

"Into  the  Pacific!" 

"  Let  us  go !  " 

A  quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  two  savants  were  descend- 
ing the  declivity  of  the  Rocky  Mountains;  and  two  days 
after,  at  the  same  time  as  their  friends  of  the  Gun  Club, 


J.  T.  MASTON  RECALLED    .  371 

they  arrived  at  San  Francisco,  having  killed  five  horses  on 
the  road. 

Elphinstone,  the  brothers  Blomsberry,  and  Bilsby  rushed 
towards  them  on  their  arrival. 

"  What  shall  we  do  ?  "  they  exclaimed. 

"  Fish  up  the  projectile,"  replied  J.  T.  Maston,  "  and  the 
sooner  the  better." 


CHAPTER  XXII 

RECOVERED  FROM  THE  SEA 

The  spot  where  the  projectile  sank  under  the  waves  was 
exactly  known ;  but  machinery  to  grasp  it  and  bring  it  to  the 
surface  of  the  ocean  was  still  wanting.  It  must  first  be 
invented,  then  made.  American  engineers  could  not  be 
troubled  with  such  trifles.  The  grappling-irons  once  fixed, 
by  their  help  they  were  sure  to  raise  it  in  spite  of  its  weight, 
which  was  lessened  by  the  density  of  the  liquid  in  which  it 
was  plunged. 

But  fishing  up  the  projectile  was  not  the  only  thing  to  be 
thought  of.  They  must  act  promptly  in  the  interest  of  the 
unfortunate  travelers.  No  one  doubted  that  they  were 
still  living. 

"  Yes,"  repeated  J.  T.  Maston  incessantly,  whose  confi- 
dence gained  over  everybody,  "our  friends  are  clever 
people,  and  they  can  not  have  fallen  like  simpletons.  They 
are  alive,  quite  alive ;  but  we  must  make  haste  if  we  wish  to 
find  them  so.  Food  and  water  do  not  trouble  me ;  they  have 
enough  for  a  long  while.  But  air,  air,  that  is  what  they 
will  soon  want ;  so  quick,  quick !  " 

And  they  did  go  quick.  They  fitted  up  the  Susquehanna 
for  her  new  destination.  Her  powerful  machinery  was 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  hauling-chains.  The  aluminium 
projectile  only  weighed  19,250  lbs.,  a  weight  very  inferior 
to  that  of  the  trans-atlantic  cable  which  had  been  drawn  up 
under  similar  conditions.  The  only  difficulty  wasin  fish- 
ing up  a  cylindro-conical  projectile,  the  walls  of  which  were 
so  smooth  as  to  offer  no  hold  for  the  hooks.  On  that  account 
engineer  Murchison  hastened  to  San  Francisco,  and  had 
some  enormous  grappling-irons  fixed  on  an  automatic  sys- 
tem, which  would  never  let  the  projectile  go  if  it  once  sue- 


372  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

ceeded  in  seizing  it  in  its  powerful  claws.  Diving-dresses 
were  also  prepared,  which  through  this  impervious  covering 
allowed  the  divers  to  observe  the  bottom  of  the  sea.  He 
also  had  put  on  board  an  apparatus  of  compressed  air  very 
cleverly  designed.  There  were  perfect  chambers  pierced 
with  scuttles,  which,  with  water  let  into  certain  compart- 
ments, could  draw  it  down  into  great  depths.  These  ap- 
paratuses were  at  San  Francisco,  where  they  had  been  used 
in  the  construction  of  a  submarine  breakwater;  and  very 
fortunately  it  was  so,  for  there  was  no  time  to  construct 
any.  But  in  spite  of  the  perfection  of  the  machinery,  in 
spite  of  the  ingenuity  of  the  savants  entrusted  with  the  use 
of  them,  the  success  of  the  operation  was  far  from  being 
certain.  How  great  were  the  chances  against  them,  the 
projectile  being  20,000  feet  under  the  water!  And  if  even 
it  was  brought  to  the  surface,  how  would  the  travelers  have 
borne  the  terrible  shock  which  20,000  feet  of  water  had 
perhaps  not  sufficiently  broken  ?  At  any  rate  they  must  act 
quickly.  J.  T.  Maston  hurried  the  workmen  day  and  night. 
He  was  ready  to  don  the  diving-dress  himself,  or  try  the  air 
apparatus,  in  order  to  reconnoiter  the  situation  of  his  coura- 
geous friends. 

But  in  spite  of  all  diligence  displayed  in  preparing  the 
different  engines,  in  spite  of  the  considerable  sum  placed 
at  the  disposal  of  the  Gun  Club  by  the  Government  of  the 
Union,  five  long  days  (five  centuries!)  elapsed  before  the 
preparations  were  complete.  During  this  time  public  opin- 
ion was  excited  to  the  highest  pitch.  Telegrams  were  ex- 
changed incessantly  throughout  the  entire  world  by  means 
of  wires  and  electric  cables.  The  saving  of  Barbicane, 
Nicholl,  and  Michel  Ardan  was  an  international  affair. 
Every  one  who  had  subscribed  to  the  Gun  Club  was  directly 
interested  in  the  welfare  of  the  travelers. 

At  length  the  hauling-chains,  the  air-chambers,  and  the 
automatic  grappling-irons  were  put  on  board.  J.  T.  Mas- 
ton,  Engineer  Murchison,  and  the  delegates  of  the  Gun 
Club,  were  already  in  their  cabins.  They  had  but  to  start, 
which  they  did  on  the  21st  of  December,  at  eight  o'clock  at 
night,  the  corvette  meeting  with  a  beautiful  sea,  a  north- 
easterly wind,  and  rather  sharp  cold.  The  whole  population 
of  San  Francisco  was  gathered  on  the  quay,  greatly  excited 
but  silent,  reserving  their  hurrahs  for  the  return.     Steam 


RECOVERED  FROM  THE  SEA  373 

was  fully  up,  and  the  screw  of  the  Susquehanna  carried  them 
briskly  out  of  the  bay. 

It  is  needless  to  relate  the  conversations  on  board  be- 
tween the  officers,  sailors,  and  passengers.  All  these  men 
had  but  one  thought.  All  these  hearts  beat  under  the  same 
emotion.  While  they  were  hastening  to  help  them,  what 
were  Barbicane  and  his  companions  doing?  What  had  be- 
come of  them?  Were  they  able  to  attempt  any  bold 
maneuver  to  regain  their  liberty?  None  could  say.  The 
truth  is  that  every  attempt  must  have  failed!  Immersed 
nearly  four  miles  under  the  ocean,  this  metal  prison  defied 
every  effort  of  its  prisoners. 

On  the  23d  inst,  at  eight  in  the  morning,  after  a  rapid 
passage,  the  Susquehanna  was  due  at  the  fatal  spot.  They 
must  wait  till  twelve  to  take  the  reckoning  exactly.  The 
buoy  to  which  the  sounding  line  had  been  lashed  had  not 
yet  been  recognized. 

At  twelve,  Captain  Blomsberry,  assisted  by  his'  officers 
who  superintended  the  observations,  took  the  reckoning  in 
the  presence  of  the  delegates  of  the  Gun  Club.  Then  there 
was  a  moment  of  anxiety.  Her  position  decided,  the  Sus- 
quehanna was  found  to  be  some  minutes  to  westward  of  the 
spot  where  the  projectile  had  disappeared  beneath  the  waves. 

The  ship's  course  was  then  changed  so  as  to  reach  this 
exact  point. 

At  forty-seven  minutes  past  twelve  they  reached  the 
buoy;  it  was  in  perfect  condition,  and  must  have  shifted  but 
little. 

"  At  last !  "  exclaimed  J.  T.  Maston. 

"Shall  we  begin?"  asked  Captain  Blomsberry. 

"  Without  losing  a  second." 

Every  precaution  was  taken  to  keep  the  corvette  almost 
completely  motionless.  Before  trying  to  seize  the  pro- 
jectile, Engineer  Murchison  wanted  to  find  its  exact  position 
at  the  bottom  of  the  ocean.  The  submarine  apparatus  des- 
tined for  this  expedition  was  supplied  with  air.  The  work- 
ing of  these  engines  was  not  without  danger,  for  at  20,000 
feet  below  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  under  such  great 
pressure,  they  were  exposed  to  fracture,  the  consequences 
of  which  would  be  dreadful. 

J.  T.  Maston,  the  brothers  Blomsberry,  and  Engineer 
Murchison,  without  heeding  these  dangers,  took  their  places 


374  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

in  the  air-chamber.  The  commander,  posted  on  his  bridge, 
superintended  the  operation,  ready  to  stop  or  haul  in  the 
chains  on  the  slightest  signal.  The  screw  had  been  shipped, 
and  the  whole  power  of  the  machinery  collected  on  the 
capstan  would  have  quickly  drawn  the  appartus  on  board. 
The  descent  began  at  twenty-five  minutes  past  one  at  night, 
and  the  chamber,  drawn  under  by  the  reservoirs  full  of 
water,  disappeared  from  the  surface  of  the  ocean. 

_  The  emotion  of  the  officers  and  sailors  on  board  was  now 
divided  between  the  prisoners  in  the  projectile  and  the 
prisoners  in  the  submarine  apparatus.  As  to  the  latter,  they 
forgot  themselves,  and,  glued  to  the  windows  of  the  scuttles, 
attentively  watched  the  liquid  mass  through  which  they 
were  passing. 

The  descent  was  rapid.  At  seventeen  minutes  past  two, 
J.  T.  Maston  and  his  companions  had  reached  the  bottom 
of  the  Pacific;  but  they  saw  nothing  but  an  arid  desert,  no 
longer  animated  by  either  fauna  or  flora.  By  the  light  of 
their  lamps,  furnished  with  powerful  reflectors,  they  could 
see  the  dark  beds  of  the  ocean  for  a  considerable  extent  of 
view,  but  the  projectile  was  nowhere  to  be  seen. 

The  impatience  of  these  bold  divers  can  not  be  described, 
and  having  an  electrical  communication  with  the  corvette, 
they  hade  a  signal  already  agreed  upon,  and  for  the  space 
of  a  mile  the  Susquehanna  moved  their  chamber  along  some 
yards  above  the  bottom. 

Thus  they  explored  the  whole  submarine  plain,  deceived 
at  every  turn  by  optical  illusions  which  almost  broke  their 
hearts.  Here  a  rock,  there  a  projection  from  the  ground, 
seemed  to  be  the  much-sought- for  projectile ;  but  their  mis- 
take was  soon  discovered,  and  then  they  were  in  despair. 

"  But  where  are  they?  where  are  they?  "  cried  J.  T.  Mas- 
ton.  And  the  poor  man  called  loudly  upon  Nicholl,  Bar- 
bicane,  and  Michel  Ardan,  as  if  his  unfortunate  friends 
could  either  hear  or  answer  him  through  such  an  impene- 
trable medium!  The  search  continued  under  the  condi- 
tions until  the  vitiated  air  compelled  the  divers  to  ascend. 

The  hauling  in  began  about  six  in  the  evening,  and  was 
not  ended  before  midnight. 

"  To-morrow,"  said  J.  T.  Maston,  as  he  set  foot  on  the 
bridge  of  the  corvette. 

"  Yes,"  answered  Captain  Blomsberry. 


RECOVERED  FROM  THE  SEA  375 

"And  on  another  spot?" 
"  Yes." 

J.  T.  Maston  did  not  doubt  of  their  final  success,  but  his 
companions,  no  longer  upheld  by  the  excitement  of  the  first 
hours,  understood  all  the  difficulty  of  the  enterprise.  What 
seemed  easy  at  San  Francisco,  seemed  here  in  the  wide 
ocean  almost  impossible.  The  chances  of  success  dimin- 
ished in  rapid  proportion;  and  it  was  from  chance  alone 
that  the  meeting  with  the  projectile  might  be  expected. 

The  next  day,  the  24th,  in  spite  of  the  fatigue  of  the  pre- 
vious day,  the  operation  was  renewed.  The  corvette  ad- 
vanced some  minutes  to  westward,  and  the  apparatus,  pro- 
vided with  air,  bore  the  same  explorers  to  the  depths  of  the 
ocean. 

The  whole  day  passed  in  fruitless  research;  the  bed  of 
the  sea  was  a  desert.  The  25th  brought  no  other  result, 
nor  the  26th. 

It  was  disheartening.  They  thought  of  those  unfortu- 
nates shut  up  in  the  projectile  for  twenty-six  days.  Per- 
haps at  that  moment  they  were  experiencing  the  first  ap- 
proach of  suffocation;  that  is,  if  they  had  escaped  the  dan- 
gers of  their  fall.  The  air  was  spent,  and  doubtless  with 
the  air  all  their  morale. 

"  The  air,  possibly,"  answered  J.  T.  Maston,  resolutely, 
"  but  their  morale  never !  " 

On  the  28th,  after  two  more  days  of  search,  all  hope  was 
gone.  This  projectile  was  but  an  atom  in  the  immensity  of 
the  ocean.     They  must  give  up  all  idea  of  finding  it. 

But  J.  T.  Maston  would  not  hear  of  going  away.  He 
would  not  abandon  the  place  without  at  least  discovering  the 
tomb  of  his  friends.  But  Commander  Blomsberry  could  no 
longer  persist,  and  in  spite  of  the  exclamations  of  the  worthy 
Secretary,  was  obliged  to  give  the  order  to  sail. 

On  the  29th  of  December,  at  nine  a.  m.,  the  Susquehanna, 
heading  N.  K,  resumed  her  course  to  the  bay  of  San  Fran- 
cisco. 

It  was  ten  in  the  morning;  the  corvette  was  under  half 
steam,  as  if  regretting  to  leave  the  spot  where  the  catastrophe 
bad  taken  place,  when  a  sailor,  perched  on  the  maintop-gal- 
lant cross-trees,  watching  the  sea,  cried  suddenly : 
"  A  buoy  on  the  lee  bow !  " 
The  officers  looked  in  the  direction  indicated,  and  by  the 


376  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

help  of  their  glasses,  saw  that  the  object  signaled  had  the 
appearance  of  one  of  those  buoys  which  are  used  to  mark 
the  passages  of  bays  or  rivers.  But,  singularly  to  say,  a 
flag  floating  on  the  wind  surmounted  its  cone,  which 
emerged  five  or  six  feet  out  of  the  water.  This  buoy  shone 
under  the  rays  of  the  sun  as  if  it  had  been  made  of  plates 
of  silver.  Commander  Blomsberry,  J.  T.  Maston,  and  the 
delegates  of  the  Gun  Club  were  mounted  on  the  bridge,  ex- 
amining this  object  straying  at  random  on  the  waves. 

All  looked  with  feverish  anxiety,  but  in  silence.  None 
dare  give  expression  to  the  thoughts  which  came  to  the 
minds  of  all. 

The  corvette  approached  to  within  two  cables'  lengths  of 
the  object. 

A  shudder  ran  through  the  whole  crew.  That  flag  was 
the  American  flag! 

At  this  moment  a  perfect  howling  was  heard;  it  was  the 
brave  J.  T.  Maston,  who  had  just  fallen  all  in  a  heap.  For- 
getting on  the  one  hand  that  his  right  arm  had  been  re- 
placed by  an  iron  hook,  and  on  the  other  that  a  simple  gutta- 
percha cap  covered  his  brain-box,  he  had  given  himself  a 
formidable  blow. 

They  hurried  towards  him,  picked  him  up,  restored  him  to 
life.     And  what  were  his  first  words? 

"  Ah !  trebly  brutes !  quadruply  idiots !  quintuply  boobies 
that  we  are !  " 

"What  is  it?"  exclaimed  everyone  around  him. 

"What  is  it?" 

"  Come,  speak !  " 

"It  is,  simpletons,"  howled  the  terrible  Secretary,  " it 
is  that  the  projectile  only  weighs  19,250  lbs! " 

"Well?" 

"  And  that  it  displaces  twenty-eight  tons,  or  in  other 
words,  56,000  lbs,  and  that  consequently  it  floats!" 

Ah !  what  stress  the  worthy  man  laid  on  the  verb  "  float !  " 
And  it  was  true!  All,  yes!  all  these  savants  had  forgotten 
this  fundamental  law,  namely,  that  on  account  of  its  specific 
lightness,  the  projectile,  after  having  been  drawn  by  its  fall 
to  the  greatest  depths  of  the  ocean,  must  naturally  return 
to  the  surface.  And  now  it  was  floating  quietly  at  the 
mercy  of  the  waves. 

The  boats  were  put  to  sea.     J.  T.  Maston  and  his  friends 


RECOVERED  FROM  THE  SEA  377 

had  rushed  into  them!  Excitement  was  at  its  height! 
Every  heart  beat  loudly  whilst  they  advanced  to  the  pro- 
jectile. What  did  it  contain?  Living  or  dead?  Living, 
yes!  living,  at  least  unless  death  had  struck  Barbicane  and 
his  two  friends  since  they  had  hoisted  the  flag.  Profound 
silence  reigned  on  the  boats.  All  were  breathless.  Eyes 
no  longer  saw.  One  of  the  scuttles  of  the  projectile  was 
open.  Some  pieces  of  glass  remained  in  the  frame,  showing 
that  it  had  been  broken.  This  scuttle  was  actually  five  feet 
above  the  water. 

A  boat  came  alongside,  that  of  J.  T.  Maston,  and  J.  T. 
Maston  rushed  to  the  broken  window. 

At  that  moment  they  heard  a  clear  and  merry  voice,  it 
was  the  voice  of  Michel  Ardan,  exclaiming  in  an  accent  of 
triumph : 

"  Blanks  all,  Barbicane,  blanks  all!  " 

Barbicane,  Michel  Ardan,  and  Nicholl  were  playing  at 
dominoes ! 

CHAPTER  XXIII 

THE  END 

We  may  remember  the  intense  sympathy  which  had  ac- 
companied the  travelers  on  their  departure.  If  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  enterprise  they  had  excited  such  emotion  both 
in  the  old  and  new  world,  with  what  enthusiasm  would  they 
be  received  on  their  return!  The  millions  of  spectators 
which  had  beset  the  peninsula  of  Florida,  would  they  not 
rush  to  meet  these  sublime  adventurers?  Those  legions  of 
strangers,  hurrying  from  all  parts  of  the  globe  towards  the 
American  shores,  would  they  leave  the  Union  without  hav- 
ing seen  Barbicane,  Nicholl,  and  Michel  Ardan?  No!  and  the 
ardent  passion  of  the  public  was  bound  to  respond  worthily 
to  the  greatness  of  the  enterprise.  Human  creatures  who 
had  left  the  terrestrial  sphere,  and  return  after  this  strange 
voyage  into  celestial  space,  could  not  fail  to  be  received  as 
the  prophet  Elias  would  be  if  he  came  back  to  earth.  To 
see  them  first,  and  then  to  hear  them,  such  was  the  universal 
longing. 

Barbicane,  Michel  Ardan,  Nicholl,  and  the  delegates  of 
the  Gun  Club,  returning  without  delay  to  Baltimore,  were 
received   with    indescribable    enthusiasm.      The    notes    of 


378  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

President  Barbicane's  voyage  were  ready  to  be  given  to  the 
public.  The  New  York  Herald  bought  the  manuscript  at 
a  price  not  yet  known,  but  which  must  have  been  very  high. 
Indeed,  during  the  publication  of  "  A  Journey  to  the  Moon," 
the  sale  of  this  paper  amounted  to  five  millions  of  copies. 
Three  days  after  the  return  of  the  travelers  to  the  earth, 
the  slightest  detail  of  their  expedition  was  known.  There 
remained  nothing  more  but  to  see  the  heroes  of  this  super- 
human enterprise. 

The  expedition  of  Barbicane  and  his  friends  round  the 
moon  had  enabled  them  to  correct  the  many  admitted  theo- 
ries regarding  the  terrestrial  satellite.  These  savants  had 
observed  de  visu,  and  under  particular  circumstances. 
They  knew  what  systems  should  be  rejected,  what  retained 
with  regard  to  the  formation  of  that  orb,  its  origin,  its 
habitability.  Its  past,  present,  and  future  had  even  given 
up  their  last  secrets.  Who  could  advance  objections  against 
conscientious  observers,  who  at  less  than  twenty-four  miles 
distance  had  marked  that  curious  mountain  of  Tycho,  the 
strangest  sytsem  of  lunar  orography?  How  answer  those 
savants  whose  sight  had  penetrated  the  abyss  of  Pluto's 
circle?  How  contradict  those  bold  ones  whom  the  chances 
of  their  enterprise  had  borne  over  that  invisible  face  of  the 
disc,  which  no  human  eye  until  then  had  ever  seen  ?  It  was 
now  their  turn  to  impose  some  limit  on  that  Selenographic 
science,  which  had  reconstructed  the  lunar  world  as  Cuvier 
did  the  skeleton  of  a  fossil,  and  say,  "  The  moon  was  this, 
a  habitable  world,  inhabited  before  the  earth!  The  moon 
is  that,  a  world  uninhabitable,  and  now  uninhabited." 

To  celebrate  the  return  of  its  most  illustrious  member  and 
his  two  companions,  the  Gun  Club  decided  upon  giving  a 
banquet,  but  a  banquet  worthy  of  the  conquerors,  worthy 
of  the  American  people,  and  under  such  conditions  that  all 
the  inhabitants  of  the  Union  could  directly  take  part  in  it. 

All  the  head  lines  of  railroads  in  the  State  were  joined 
by  flying  rails ;  and  on  all  the  platforms,  lined  with  the  same 
flags,  and  decorated  with  the  same  ornaments,  were  tables 
laid  and  all  served  alike.  At  certain  hours,  successively  cal- 
culated, marked  by  electric  clocks  which  beat  the  seconds  at 
the  same  time,  the  population  were  invited  to  take  their  place 
at  the  banquet  tables.  For  four  days,  from  the  5th  to  the 
9th  of  January,  the  trains  were  stopped  as  they  are  on  Sun- 


THE  END  379 

days  on  the  railways  of  the  United  States,  and  every  road 
was  open.  One  engine  only  at  full  speed,  drawing  a 
triumphal  carriage,  had  the  right  of  traveling  for  those  four 
days  on  the  railroads  of  the  United  States. 

The  engine  was  manned  by  a  driver  and  a  stoker,  and 
bore,  by  special  favor,  the  Hon.  J.  T.  Maston,  Secretary 
of  the  Gun  Club.  The  carriage  was  reserved  for  President 
Barbicane,  Colonel  Nicholl,  and  Michel  Ardan.  At  the 
whistle  of  the  driver,  amid  the  hurrahs,  and  all  the  admiring 
vociferations  of  the  American  language,  the  train  left  the 
platform  of  Baltimore.  It  traveled  at  a  speed  of  70  miles  in 
the  hour.  But  what  was  this  speed  compared  with  that 
which  had  carried  the  three  heroes  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Columbiad  ? 

Thus  they  sped  from  one  town  to  the  other,  finding  whole 
populations  at  table  on  their  road,  saluting  them  with  the 
same  acclamations,  lavishing  the  same  bravos!  They 
traveled  in  this  way  through  the  east  of  the  Union,  Pennsyl- 
vania, Connecticut,  Massachusetts,  Vermont,  Maine,  and 
New  Hampshire;  the  north  and  the  west  by  New  York, 
Ohio,  Michigan,  and  Wisconsin;  returning  to  the  south  by 
Illinois,  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Texas,  and  Louisiana;  they 
went  to  the  southeast  by  Alabama  and  Flordia,  going  up  by 
Georgia  and  the  Carolinas,  visiting  the  center  by  Tennessee, 
Kentucky,  Virginia,  and  Indiana,  and,  after  quitting  the 
Washington  station,  re-entered  Baltimore,  where  for  four 
days  one  would  have  thought  that  the  United  States  of 
America  were  seated  at  one  immense  banquet,  saluting  them 
simultaneously  with  the  same  hurrahs !  The  apotheosis  was 
worthy  of  these  three  heroes  whom  fable  would  have  placed 
in  the  rank  of  demigods. 

And  now  will  this  attempt,  unprecedented  in  the  annals 
of  travel,  lead  to  any  practical  result?  Will  direct  com- 
munication with  the  moon  ever  be  established  ?  Will  they 
ever  lay  the  foundation  of  a  traveling  service  through  the 
solar  world?  Will  they  go  from  one  planet  to  another, 
from  Jupiter  to  Mercury,  and  after  awhile  from  one  star  to 
another,  from  the  Polar  to  Sirius?  Will  this  means  of  lo- 
comotion allow  us  to  visit  those  suns  which  swarm  in  the 
firmament  ? 

To  such  questions  no  answer  can  be  given.  But  know- 
ing the  bold  ingenuity  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  race,  no  one 


380  A  TOUR  OF  THE  MOON 

would  be  astonished  if  the  Americans  seek  to  make  some 
use  of  President  Barbicane's  attempt. 

Thus,  some  time  after  the  return  of  the  travelers,  the  pub- 
lic received  with  marked  favor  the  announcement  of  a  com- 
pany, limited  with  a  capital  of  a  hundred  million  of  dollars, 
divided  into  a  hundred  thousand  shares  of  a  thousand  dol- 
lars each,  under  the  name  of  the  "National  Company  of 
Interstellary  Communication."  President  Barbicane ;  Vice- 
president,  Captain  Nicholl;  Secretary,  J.  T.  Maston;  Direc- 
tor of  Movements,  Michel  Ardan. 

And  as  it  is  part  of  the  American  temperament  to  foresee 
everything  in  business,  even  failure,  the  Honorable  Harry 
Trolloppe,  and  Francis  Drayton,  magistrate,  were  nomi- 
nated, beforehand,  assignees  in  bankruptcy! 


THE  END 


a*&& 


u****^- 


it 


